Quad bikes: As a member of the National Farmers' Federation, Primary Producers SA is pleased there is to be a new safety standard for the manufacture of all new quad bikes.
This requires that within 12 months, all new quad bikes will display warning labels alerting riders to the risk of rollover.
In addition, within 24 months, all new quad bikes must be fitted with an operator protection device at the point of sale.
It is hoped these new safety standards will save lives and protect producers and their employees from crippling injury.
Details: Rob Kerin 0439 933 103. Robe meeting: Federal Agriculture Minister Bridget McKenzie will be the keynote speaker at Livestock SA's Southern Region meeting on February 7 at the Robe Bowling Club, starting at 6pm.
Attendance for Livestock SA members and producers is free, with a complimentary barbeque tea to be served and drinks available for purchase at the bar.
Details: Register with Livestock SA on 08 8297 2299. Dairy code: The SA Dairyfarmers' Association has welcomed the new mandatory Dairy Code of Conduct
This code, which came into effect on January 1, will operate to govern the relationship between milk processors and dairyfarmers, as processors will be required to tell farmers how much they are going to be paid over the time frame of their contracts.
It will assist in providing a level playing field.
The Australian Competition & Consumer Commission has updated and improved its dispute resolution process and will have the power to issue fines to processors if the code is breached.
Details: John Hunt 0418 406 400. GPSA membership: As another year begins, all SA grain producers are invited to become members of their peak industry body, Grain Producers SA.
Membership to GPSA is available for growers of grain in SA who contribute to the Primary Industries Funding Scheme for grain that they produce and sell.
To learn more about GPSA membership, or to join, go to tinyurl.com/GPSAmembership.
Details: Caroline Rhodes 1300 734 884.
Word count: 331
