GPSA chair: At the Grain Producers SA annual general meeting, Hamley Bridge grower Adrian McCabe became the chair. Mr McCabe, who grows cereals, pulses and canola, was first appointed to the GPSA board in 2016. The meeting farewelled Wade Dabinett, after six years on the board and four as chair. Mr Dabinett has been a passionate advocate for grain producers.
Details: Caroline Rhodes 1300 734 884. Agvet products: Primary Producers SA has been asked to help increase awareness of the role of the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority among users of agricultural and veterinary chemical products. The APVMA is responsible for the assessment, registration and regulation of agricultural and veterinary chemicals from manufacture or importation to the point of sale. There is an adverse experience reporting program where producers can play a key role in ensuring the supply of safe and effective products by reporting adverse events where there may be risks to safety, a lack of efficacy when the correct label dose is used, and any other unintended or unexpected side effects.
Details: APVMA 1800 700 583 or AERP@apvma.gov.au Biosecurity survey: Livestock SA is seeking input to provide insights into producer attitudes towards biosecurity. The information collected will be used to help shape and monitor the SA Livestock Biosecurity Extension program, ensuring the support provided by the program meets the needs of both industry and producers. Those completing the survey will be in the running to win a $200 Allingtons voucher. To access the survey, visit the Livestock SA website.
Details: Andrew Curtis 0419 037 569. Project call: The SA Dairyfarmers' Association is seeking applications for new projects to receive help from the SA Dairy Industry Fund. More than $1 million has been funnelled into projects that have had direct benefit to SA dairyfarmers. Recent projects have included research into biochar and the value of dung beetles, and the quad bike rollover subsidy scheme. The board is calling for expressions of interest from farmers, industry and interested groups for further projects.
Details: John Elferink 0418 406 400 or dairyindustryfund@sada.asn.au
CREDIT: Jacinta Rose
Word count: 344
