Good farm management is more circular than linear - it is not a matter of ploughing forward without looking back.
The action learning cycle should be in play all the time.
If you can imagine a clock, starting at 12 you have the review process, at 3 the planning, at 6 the action or implementation, at 9 the monitoring and then we arrive back at 12 again and the cycle repeats itself.
Planning without a review of past performance is a little unfortunate, as many lessons can be learned and improvements made as result of rigorous analysis of last year's outcomes.
Without a review it would be like driving a car without the rear view and side mirrors - you need to look into them to make forward decisions. Imagine driving a car without mirrors.
In doing an analysis of the previous year, it is important to not only review the kilograms or tonnes produced but to also research how efficient you were in achieving it.
This will require you to undertake back calculations in many cases and for this to be done effectively, some measurements will have had to be made along the way.
The phenotype or the way an animal looks or ends up is made up of the genetics and how those genetics are managed.
For a grazier to be successful, they must first and foremost see themselves as grass farmers.
It is how efficient they are at turning pasture into saleable product that is vitally important.
Good genetics will not necessarily make up for poor nutrition and management.
Take a mob of trade steers that are bought in the saleyards and the buyer has little understanding of how good the genetics are.
To determine how efficient they are, the buyer will do a daily weight gain per animal at the point of sale, which is a good starting point.
This still does not tell us how efficient the steers were in gaining that weight. Here is where having the ability to do back calculations becomes important.
If the steers were bought in at 300 kilograms liveweight and sold out at 450kg, 150 days later, they have gained 1kg a day.
The steers were introduced to a paddock at 1500kg of dry matter pasture a hectare and the residual was 1000kg when they were removed.
In the five months, the paddock averaged 40kg of dry matter pasture growth a day, or a total of 6 tonnes of pasture growth.
This, combined with the run down of 500kg due to grazing, means the per hectare utilisation was 6500kg of dry matter pasture.
If 20 per cent of this figure is lost to wastage such as trampling and other factors, this leaves 5200kg/ha consumed by the steers across the 150 days.
The stocking rate was five steers/ha so the daily consumption was 35kg/ha or 7kg of dry matter per steer.
Given they grew at 1kg of bodyweight a day, we can now determine an efficiency rate of 7kg of dry matter pasture to 1kg of weight gain.
Given that previous lines of trade steers had been more efficient in their conversion of pasture dry matter to liveweight gain, it places the trader in a better position when deciding future purchases.
It is the willingness to develop a measure to manage approach and do the subsequent back calculations that enable better decisions going forward.
Details: kensolly@rbm.com.au
CREDIT: KEN SOLLY
Word count: 569
