FROM the start of the Suncorp Super Netball in 2017 – the best domestic competition in the world, says Adelaide Thunderbirds board member Steve Nolis – until April this year, his team won just one game.
Since then it has won two more, better but little more than an incremental rise. Yet, says Mr Nolis, supporters should hold tight. Behind the scenes change is happening at Priceline Stadium.
It’s all about thinking big, says Mr Nolis, who is leading the commercial charge along with Thunderbirds general manager Mel Cooper.
This month, at the netball World Cup which began in England yesterday, the Thunderbirds will be represented by players from five nations – England, Jamaica, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
Bringing in a hard core of achievers is paying dividends. Coach Tania Obst has returned after a spell as assistant coach of England where she spent time with Layla Guscoth, an Oxford University-educated doctor and now a Thunderbirds mainstay.
The team’s superstar, of course, is Silver Ferns goalshooter Maria Folau – “one of the nicest people you can meet”, says Mr Nolis and, pivotally, a social media influencer. He says the impact Folau has had on young goalshooter Sasha Glasgow has been immense.
Folau is one of the highest-paid players in the competition but, says Mr Nolis, she is here because she wants to help in resurrecting the fortunes of the Thunderbirds.
But money is vital if the T-Birds are going to thrive both on and off the court. More women play netball in Australia than any other sport. Most matches at Priceline Stadium are sellouts but cash is tight. In the financial year ending 2018, the organisation incurred a $193,000 loss on a $6.77 million income.
The two biggest challenges, ironically, are posed by sport. Even in netball there is no escaping the footy, particularly the soaring success of the AFLW.
“A lot more girls are playing football, which is fantastic and the State Government is supporting those programs which they should, but not at the expense of traditional female sports,” Mr Nolis says.
“We have a lot of community clubs that need court upgrades, new equipment and support. We run on the smell of an oily rag.
“We would like to see some more backing from the Government in supporting the highest-participation sport for women. Don’t forget about us; this is an inclusive sport that anyone can play.” Mr Nolis, the executive director (commercial) of the Local Government Association, is equally adamant that netball can’t have the mentality that women’s footy is a problem. As he says, girls playing any sport is a huge plus.
There is no escaping that the Thunderbirds are dependent on others for their existence. Grants of $6.1 million from the State Government to Netball SA in 2017 allowed upgrades to Priceline Stadium, lighting, technology and point-of-sale to the fore.
“Netball SA funds the Thunderbirds, essentially. We do get support from Netball Australia, but we need to channel those funds to support our member clubs, so it’s finding the balance between supporting community clubs and supporting the elite competition,” Mr Nolis says. Suncorp Super Netball is an eight-club league where even a minor edge can mean a great deal.
Collingwood, Melbourne and the Giants are funded from elite programs whereas the Thunderbirds, as a member-based organisation, also prop up about 350 clubs across SA. It is a costly exercise.
A fair playing field then?
“Not really, no,” Mr Nolis says. “It is what it is; we focus on ourselves not others.” Part of which involves looking beyond SA.
“We need to grow; you have a tough limited market in SA. With the AFL and AFLW, the corporate dollar only goes so far, you need to be innovative,” he says.
And so last month, the Thunderbirds played a match in Darwin – a huge hit with players and fans, and the free-to-air TV coverage a huge PR thrust.
“How can we be proactive around growing our business and supporter base and grow our brand? Well, the answer is not to limit ourselves to within the state or country,” Mr Nolis says.
“Elite clubs don’t just fish in their own backyard. The first step was the Darwin game; financially it was a windfall for us. Once you get more eyeballs on your game then it creates more corporate interest.” Despite improvements, the stadium is deeply limiting, with its 3000 capacity not commensurate with elite sport.
“The best-case scenario is a purpose-built stadium at Memorial Drive shared by other sports. Where does every other city build their stadiums?” It is a balancing act he admits – a 10,000 capacity stadium and only 3000 spectators is not a good look.
“We have to get the grassroots right first, a settled team, build the brand of our players, get core sponsorship, look outside SA and build momentum going into a bigger stadium,” Mr Nolis says.
The Adelaide Entertainment Centre, where the last home match against NSW Swifts was played in front of a huge crowd is on the radar as a new base – but that will depend on economics.
“A big stadium comes with LED big screens, more collateral to sell to corporates, you can sell match-day boxes, take clients,” Mr Nolis says.
Admirable, but the immediate uplift comes through youngsters such as Sasha Glasgow – and experience such as Maria Folau.
“When Tania Obst told us she was coming I almost cried, she is a beautiful person. I got her autograph when I was a bit younger …” Glasgow says.
“She always makes herself available, she’s not selfish.”Good starts begin the team bonding, without question. Now for the rest.
CREDIT: SPECIAL REPORT RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 948
