A coalition of 13 Aboriginal organisations of the Northern Territory have called for the national cabinet to immediately guarantee supply of affordable food and other basics in locked-down remote communities.
Two weeks ago, the commonwealth and NT governments met with major supermarkets, suppliers and three major remote retailers, yet remote community owned stores say they are still waiting to hear about any government interventions that might flow from that meeting.
"We are getting daily reports of remote stores struggling to supply basic goods," said John Paterson, the CEO of the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance of the NT.
"Some stores are running out of fresh food three days after their weekly delivery.
"In recent weeks, the big supermarkets have responded to panic buying down south by sweeping up the bulk of goods from manufacturers and producers.
"We want an agreed proportion of these essential goods set aside for the independent suppliers. This can't be solved through donated goods. It needs a systemic response from government," Mr Paterson said.
Secondary to the issue of shortages is prices within communities.
"Prices in remote community owned stores are also a big issue. This is borne out in every market basket survey. High freight costs and limited purchasing power mean prices can average 60% higher than at major supermarkets.
"The coalition of health services, land councils and other Aboriginal organisations is calling for a 20 per cent point-of-sale subsidy of essential food, cleaning and hygiene products, as well as winter bedding and clothing in remote community stores."
Community stores say invoicing the federal government for 20 per cent of their sales once a fortnight would place the least administrative burden on them.
"Already, remote community residents are taking back-roads into regional centres to access essential and affordable supplies they can't get at home. Towns are where they are most likely to contract coronavirus," Mr Patterson said.
"We understand fresh fruit, vegetables and meat are not in short supply in the southern states and distributors are actively planning to address current shortages in remote stores in central Australia," Central Land Council CEO Joe Martin-Jard, said.
"However, we believe subsidies on essential goods at point of sale coupled with a supply guarantee will make a huge difference," he said.
"We urge the national cabinet to take action, before it is too late, because time is all remote Aboriginal communities have on their side in their fight against the virus. We are all affected by this crisis, some more than others when it comes to accessing affordable food," Central Australian Aboriginal Congress CEO Donna Ah Chee said.
"We want preventative action. This is all about making sure remote Aboriginal people can depend 100% on their one community store as they are not in a position to shop around. We have no more time to waste," she said.
Claims arose last week that buying behaviour from the government-backed 'Outback Stores' chain is leaving some remote shops unable to access essential items for their communities.
Outback Stores, which is a wholly government-owned entity, has spent $1.9 million across two payments to address supply-chain uncertainties for its remote locations.
The company believes this is "maintaining reasonable stock levels across most stores due to forward planning," a spokesman for the group said.
"Outback Stores have been placing orders in line with the current sales trends for each community store. Outback Stories is also facing challenges with supply chain due to COVID-19," the spokesman said.
However, Aboriginal Investment Group Chief Executive Officer Steve Smith has attacked what he describes as "panic-buying" behaviour by the chain leaving his organisation searching as far as Adelaide for basic supplies.
AIG represent 10 shops in remote areas impacted by coronavirus restrictions, while another 25 independently-owned businesses are also believed to have been impacted.
"
CREDIT: Tom Danks
Word count: 630
