Many rural independents are following the successful 'Voices For' model established in Indi by supporters of Cathi McGowan and Helen Haines.
Voices For provides grassroots campaigns with a model for success, revolving around a hyper-local approach and policies that are formed by collecting community views through thousands of "kitchen table conversations" in people's homes - a process some groups spend years on.
While the Voices For model has provided organisation and structure for many independent candidates, another organisation, Climate 200, has supplied the funding. The fundraising organisation, convened by renewable energy investor Simon Holmes a Court, has garnered a $7-million war chest from more than 10,000 donors, to support independent candidates.
But a number of the high-profile rural independents have declined funding from Climate 200 - including Dr Haines, Nicholls candidate Rob Priestly and Groom candidate Suzie Holt, who have promised to only take donations from locals - because it could be weakness exploited by their political opponents.
Tony Windsor there was a "general disillusionment" with both sides of politics in rural communities.
"It's been said before, but I think people actually feel it more now than in the past," he said.
"People in general are disappointed or appalled with how politics is being done at the moment, irrespective of who is in government."
Australian National University political science professor John Warhurst said disillusionment in the bush had been fuelled in part by the government's response to bushfires and floods, as the regions begin to feel the effects of climate change, but voters aren't "excited by either party".
"In the cities, the Greens tend to lap up a lot of the protest votes, but they're much weaker in the country, so there is a bit more space for independents in the rural political landscape," Dr Warhurst said.
"This rise in independent candidates comes off the back of a number of state level independents, and emerging state-level parties offering people viable alternatives such as Shooters, Fishers and Farmers and SA-Best.
"Communities are seeing what's possible with the current (federal) independent MPs politicians and emulating, like Helen Haines and (Warringah MP) Zali Steggall."
CREDIT: Jamieson Murphy
Word count: 354
