THERE are numerous laws that, while initially contentious for their effect on limiting personal choice, eventually become accepted and regarded as self-evidently good. Examples include compulsory seatbelts, drink-driving laws, and public smoking restrictions.
Other laws designed to protect the community have not fared as well. Sydney’s lockout laws spring to mind.
There is an ongoing tension between a government’s obligations to the welfare of the general populace and the principle of individual freedom. Into this fray comes the relatively recent phenomenon of vaping.
Vaping has been promoted as a healthier alternative to smoking, but the relative safeness of vaping has been called in to question by some experts.
From October 1, the restrictions on vaping in SA will be as strict as those that apply to cigarettes. It will be an offence to advertise and promote e-cigarette products, have e-cigarette products on display at the point of sale, and sell e-cigarette products on the internet. It is already unlawful to vape in smoke-free areas and for shops to offer in-store sampling.
The industry has criticised the regulations for being oppressive. They say the State Government is restricting access to a product which could help people quit smoking.
But the science is not yet conclusive on the health impacts of vaping or their effectiveness in helping people quit tobacco. There has been a spate of illnesses around the world that appear to be related to vaping, but the link between vaping and these conditions is unclear.
An outbreak of lung disease in the US that appears to be linked to vaping has prompted Donald Trump to call for a ban on flavoured e-cigarettes. Several scientific studies point to potential health risks, but the sheer variability of the types of e-cigarette products available makes it difficult to state with precision what the health impacts are at this stage.
Some health bodies, such as Public Health England, have endorsed vaping as a safer alternative to smoking. But some scientific circles have pushed back on this.
Our governments should be loath to impose restrictions on our personal choice, but must also weigh up the social, economic and health costs of the actions that people may choose to take. With vaping, it seems state governments across Australia are taking a cautious approach and heeding preliminary research that indicates potential health risks.
Millions of people died of smoking-related illnesses before governments took educational and legislative measures to mitigate that health crisis.
It appears most administrations are not prepared to risk another epidemic.AMY NIKOLOVSKI IS LAW SOCIETY OF SA PRESIDENT
CREDIT: AMY NIKOLOVSKI
Word count: 427
