9 Mason Gray Strange is auctioning the contents of Munno Para cafe La Sapori. Among the items for sale are a Grimac Marozzo electronic espresso machine, a Posiflex point-of-sale system, display fridges and a six-burner stovetop. The auction is at 11.30am on Monday at Tenancy 15, 297 Peachey Rd, Munno Para. For more information, contact 0418 845 884 or visit mgs.net.au
10 More than 200 lots of Fab Four-related memorabilia will go under the hammer as part of Small & Whitfield Auctions’ sale on Tuesday. The large collection includes autographed Beatles records, framed photographs, magazines, autograph books, posters, books and paraphernalia. The auction will feature other movie, theatre and music memorabilia, including items relating to performers including Elvis Presley, Tom Cruise, John Travolta, the Spice Girls, Herman’s Hermits, and more. The sale starts at 9.30am at the Small & Whitfield rooms at 1 Unley Rd, Parkside, with bidding also online. Inspection is on site on Saturday from 9am to noon and Monday from 9am to 5pm. The catalogue is also available at smallandwhitfield.com
11 Mason Gray Strange is auctioning the contents of Mick’s Motorcycles, under instructions from liquidators. More than 600 lots are up for grabs, including new motorcycles, quad bikes, oils, equipment and apparel. The sale will be held at MGS’s auction complex at 370 Torrens Rd, Kilkenny, on Wednesday, from 10.30am. Items can be inspected between 11am and 4pm the day before the sale and from 9am on auction day. For more information, visit mgs.net.au or contact 0418 823 278
14 Some of the modern world’s biggest names – including Benjamin Franklin, Voltaire, Marcel Proust and Igor Stravinsky – will feature as part of Michael Treloar Antiquarian Booksellers’ autograph auction. Featuring signed documents, photographs and books from the collection of former federal Labor politician Barry Jones the sale also includes the signatures of other historic figures such as George Bernard Shaw, Benito Mussolini, Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher and Sir Edward “Weary” Dunlop.The catalogue is online at auctions.treloars.com and early bidding is now open.Final live online bidding gets under way at 1.30pm on Saturday
CREDIT: Auctions WITH TOM BOWDEN; DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 353
