KEEN to get in on the auction action but don’t want to spend any more time behind a computer screen?
Mason Gray Strange’s latest auction gives you the opportunity to bid on a range of quality items while watching birds fly over the picturesque Lower Murray.
The auction house has been tasked with clearing the contents of Fleurieu’s restaurant and function centre on Barrage Rd, Goolwa.
After six years, the business closed its doors for the last time earlier this year and now its entire contents is up for grabs.
Mason Gray Strange managing director and auctioneer Jamie Codling said the venue was well known and well set up to host a crowd.
“The function centre could cater for over 300 people at any one time, and accordingly has a complete kitchen to provide that service,” he says.
“In the past, they have hosted big-name bands, weddings, birthdays, conferences and the occasional wake.” Mr Codling says the sale presents a fantastic opportunity for buyers looking for all manner of things.
“On offer is the complete kit and caboodle with crockery and cutlery, a full kitchen facility with top-quality fit-out comprising a Fagor combi oven, a Fagor cooking centre, Fagor deep fryers, a pizza prep fridge, a dishwasher, chest freezers – even the stainless steel exhaust canopy and coolrooms are going under the hammer,” he says.
The auction also contains PA and audio equipment, bar equipment, a coffee machine and grinders, a complete point-of-sale register system, tables chairs, a safe and a dance floor.
“Of special note is the 4.8m stainless steel fish dry bar which is an impressive sight,” Mr Codling says.
“It’s too large for many but in the right space would be spectacular. “This auction is the entire package for anyone in hospitality, be it the smalls such as crockery, cutlery, glassware or the capital items such as ovens, fryers and a dishwasher. It’s all on offer and the astute bidder will grab a bargain.” The auction is on-site at 92 Barrage Road, Goolwa, at 11.30am on Monday. Items can be inspected from 9am that day, and buyers can also bid online at www.mgs.net.au, where you’ll also find further details.
CREDIT: Auctions with TOM BOWDEN
Word count: 368
