19 Here’s a chance for keen green thumbs to get growing. Almost 50 lots of indoor plants – including a selection of 2m palms – are up for grabs in Evans Clarke National’s online plant sale. Bidding is now open at biddingonline.com.au, with the live auction at 6pm on Thursday. Inspection of the assorted greenery is available from 2pm to 4pm on Wednesday, March 18, at 616 Torrens Rd, Woodville North.For details, call 8345 0099
21 Auction Blue’s Super Saturday sale has bargains for everyone, with a huge array of quality lots on offer from deceased estates and importers. Goods include musical instruments, vintage furniture, LP records, lawnmowers and chainsaws. The auction, at 15 Kingston Ave, Richmond, closes at 10am, with bidding online at auctionblue.com.au. Inspection is available on Friday, March 20, from 2pm to 5pm.
23 People who appreciate the finer things in life might find something new to savour at one of Small & Whitfield’s upcoming speciality auctions. The Parkside auction house is hosting two significant sales – focusing on antiques and art respectively – this month, with a jewellery auction following in early April. Antiques, collectables and objets d’art will go under the hammer at the Connoisseur’s Auction on Monday, March 23, while the fine art auction will be held the following day. The luxe fine jewellery collection auction is set to dazzle on Monday, April 6. All will be held at 5pm. Details at smallandwhitfield.com/auctions23 If you’re in the market for quality bar, kitchen and dining equipment, the closure sale of the former Blue Pepper Restaurant and Bar, at Christies Beach, may offer just what you’re looking for. Co-ordinated by Mason Gray Strange, the auction features a huge range of equipment. Items include wine fridges, a cappuccino machine, deep fryers and two point of sale registers. There are also 17 dining tables, 42 chairs and 14 bar stools. The sale is being held at 32A Beach Rd, Christies Beach, at 11am on March 23, with inspection on site from 9am. The live webcast is at interbid.com.au/mgs
CREDIT: WITH DAVID GOLDSMITH; TOM BOWDEN
Word count: 347
