Shoppers in Young will be excited with the new look ALDI set to reopen on Wednesday.
"Local residents are set to enjoy an even better shopping experience at ALDI Young as it completes a comprehensive store upgrade," an ALDI spokesperson said.
"ALDI Young closed temporarily from Wednesday September 16 and reopen on Wednesday September 30 with a fresh new look, including better product displays, improved navigation and modern styling."
According to the company many of the improvements have been implemented following extensive store trials and ALDI's state-wide rollout of its modern store design in South Australia and Western Australia.
"While we're delighted to be introducing these innovations, we want our customers to know they won't lead to higher prices," the spokesperson said.
"Low prices are a big deal for ALDI. In fact, we refuse to be beaten on price.
"This is our fundamental point of difference and one we will never give away."
The spokesperson said the new store features include redesigned shelving, expanded wooden produce bays, as well as extended energy efficient chillers. As energy management remains a key priority for ALDI, the store has energy efficient LED lighting. There will also be improved point-of-sale displays and store signage.
ALDI Young shoppers will have access to the same award-winning grocery products and popular Special Buys, together with fresh fruit, vegetables and bread delivered daily.
"At ALDI, we are proud to call ourselves 'Good Different'," the spokesperson said.
"We offer a supermarket experience that is like no other in Australia, and it's our differences that allow us to bring unbeatable value to our customers every day."
The spokesperson said the company was excited for the store to reopen.
"We're excited to be undertaking these upgrades and welcome the community to visit our new store from Wednesday September 30 and share their feedback about the store experience."
ALDI Young will continue to be supported by a team of 15-20 permanent full and part-time employees, providing a unique and rewarding career opportunity in retail.
Opening hours will also continue to be 8:30am-8pm Monday to Friday and 8:30am-7:00pm Saturday and Sunday.
For more information on ALDI Australia, please visit www.aldi.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 358
