Workers at two pharmacies in Adelaide's western suburbs have tested positive for COVID-19, as two more schools are closed due to the positive tests of a staff member & a student.
A National Pharmacies staff member at Findon is believed to have contracted the virus through a link to a cluster of infections at the Adelaide Airport.
The store was forensically cleaned on Tuesday night & 15 employees have been forced into self-isolation.
The store remains open to customers & is currently being staffed by employees from other stores.
National Pharmacies chief pharmacist Robyn Johns today said every person identified as a close contact of the case was being contacted & SA Health had advised them that no customers needed to be followed up.
She said staff now working at the Findon store would work tirelessly to serve all customers & members & reinforced it was safe to attend the store.
"As you are probably aware, pharmacy staff are on the front line of the COVID-19 pandemic so we have been very busy over the last few weeks," she said.
"We have actually installed acrylic screens at each touch point with a customer, at the dispensary & at our tills, our point of sale as well.
"We've installed social distancing markers in our store, & we've got policies & procedures that our teams follow to ensure everyone is safe."
Health Minister Stephen Wade said anyone who was directly at risk from the sick employee would be identified & extensive contact tracing was now being carried out.
Direct Chemist Outlet at the Brickworks Marketplace in Torrensville also had a staff member test positive, however the person was not contagious while working there.
It has remained open after a "deep clean" of the entire shopping mall, the centre's management said in a statement on its website.
SA Health today announced 18 new positive coronavirus cases, bringing the state's total to 385.
South Australia's chief public health officer Nicola Spurrier said 17 of the 385 were connected with baggage handlers at Adelaide Airport.
She would not say whether the pharmacy cases were connected with the Qantas baggage handler cluster.
A Qantas pilot who tested positive for COVID–19 has not been connected with the cluster.
Seven cases are in intensive care at the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
Another high school & primary school closed
Two schools in Adelaide's western suburbshave closed today after two positive coronavirus cases.
Pennington R-7 School & Pennington Children's Centre, in Adelaide's north-west, will both be closed for at least 24 hours while they are cleaned.
In a letter to parents sent on Wednesday, principal Georgina Grinsted said the school & kindergarten "will not be opening again until public health officials indicate that it is safe to do so".
She said SA Health had informed the school that the infected student teacher attended the school while potentially infectious.
"Anyone told to self-quarantine will not be allowed back at school until they have completed the quarantine period specified by health authorities," she said.
"If your child is told to self-quarantine we will provide information on contingencies for their learning while they are away."
SA Health will conduct contact tracing to determine which staff or students should go into quarantine.
Henley High School has also been closed today after a student contracted COVID-19.
The Department for Education said public health officials were now contact tracing & parents were being informed.
Heat map shows Adelaide's infection hot spots
A map of the state's COVID-19 cases shows the City of Mitcham in Adelaide's inner south has the highest number of infected people.
The State Government released the heat maps which identify where people infected with COVID-19 live, based on their council areas.
It shows Mitcham has the largest number of coronavirus infections, with between 30 & 34 cases.
Dr Spurrier said it was "probably to do with their level of international travel" as a relatively high socio-economic area.
The next highest numbers are in Marion & Charles Sturt, each recording between 25 & 29 cases.
There is no Adelaide metropolitan council that is virus-free.
The maps do not show where people contracted the virus, only the council area where they reside.
They also show the total number of cases to date, meaning some people will have recovered.
Yesterday, SA Health confirmed 30 more cases of coronavirus, taking the state's total to 367.
Six cases — all men over 50 — are in the Royal Adelaide Hospital's intensive care unit.
South Australia's Deputy Chief Public Health Officer, Michael Cusack, said five baggage handlers from Adelaide Airport were now confirmed as positive cases, on top of six who were
Another two family members of the baggage handlers have contracted the virus, Dr Cusack told a press conference yesterday, bringing the total in the cluster to 13.
Coronavirus testing criteria in South Australia has been expanded to include anyone who has visited the Adelaide Airport terminal or car park in the past 14 days & has symptoms.
Emergency department expansion brought forward
It comes as the State Government has moved to fast-track works at Flinders Medical Centre & Noarlunga Hospital, to try free up critical care beds for an expected increase in coronavirus patients.
The $45 million project was not meant to start until later this year, but parts of the Southern Expansion project will now begin within weeks.
Clinical director of medicine at Flinders Medical Centre, Professor Andrew Bersten, said shifting some acute services to Noarlunga Hospital in the coming weeks would free up beds at Flinders.
"That will start initially with 12 beds & ramping up for 30 beds increased capacity in the emergency department & that needs to be done both because of the workload that is there, & the need for isolation of some of those patients as they present," he said.
Health Minister Stephen Wade said bringing the plan forward would provide a dedicated space to treat coronavirus patients in the south of Adelaide.
"This expansion will help to reduce ramping & increase the clinical capability of Noarlunga Hospital, effectively minimising the ambulance transfers between Noarlunga & FMC," he said.
Word count: 1017
