As the string of retail casualties so far this year continues to grow, administrators of Colette by Colette Hayman have announced 33 stores will close in the next three weeks, with the future for workers unclear.
The accessories chain entered voluntary administration at the end of January, leaving around 300 jobs at risk in stores across Australia & New Zealand.
On Friday, the administrators from Deloitte Restructuring said a quarter of Colette stores will close, leaving 105 remaining, as they attempt to sell the business.
The future of the staff across the 33 "loss making" stores is unclear, but administrator Vaughan Strawbridge said "all efforts" are being made to redeploy staff.
"All staff impacted are expected to receive all their wages & entitlements in full," he noted.
"This is never easy … we are working closely with the Colette management team to effect the closures quickly while seeking to redeploy staff impacted."
Ten stores in Queensland will shut, as will eight in Victoria, six in New South Wales, five in Western Australia, one in both the ACT & South Australia, & two in New Zealand.
At the time of the collapse, the administrators said Colette had been "impacted by the current weak retail environment, as have many others".
'Element of lazy retailing' behind collapses
In the first eight weeks of the year, a number of other retailers have collapsed, including homewares chain Ishka, which announced on Thursday that it had entered administration.
Several others have announced store closures as administrators try to find buyers, including fashion retailer Bardot, Harris Scarfe & Jeanswest.
Professor Gary Mortimer from the Queensland University of Technology business school said certain sectors are more exposed to tough conditions than others.
"We've seen some & others," he observed.
"But mid-tier discounters like Harris Scarfe, mid-tier fashion brands like Bardot & Jeanswest, those particular areas are reasonably exposed to discretionary spending."
Professor Mortimer cited economic conditions as weighing on retail, including stagnating wages & people paying down debt instead of spending.
The Bureau of Statistics' wage price index this week confirmed that wage growth remains subdued, with wages rising 0.5 per cent in the final quarter of 2019, leaving the annual rate at 2.2 per cent.
However, Professor Mortimer said problems with retail businesses models are also to blame.
"I think there's a lack of innovation, a lack of differentiation. If I look at mid-tier fashion, menswear & ladieswear brands, everyone's doing $29 chinos or $20 dresses.
"I think there's also an element of lazy retailing, so retailers say, 'hey, look, we'll just do a percentage-off sale & that will increase out foot traffic,' but then everyone else repeats to 20, 30, 40 to 50 per cent off."
Several retailers have warned that the catastrophic bushfire season & drought have hurt sales, including Mosaic Brands — the owner of Rivers, Millers & Noni B — which said regional areas were particularly affected.
Now the ongoing coronavirus outbreak has disrupted business supply chains & will also be felt by retailers that rely on tourist trade.
ANZ has said the bank's internal data, including card & point of sale transactions, show a steep drop in spending at major airports in February.
Word count: 531
