QUEENSLAND’S energy crunch has partially eased after two major coal-fired generation units came back online, with the state pumping power across the border to help keep the lights on in NSW.
A day after widespread failure of Australia’s electricity market forced the energy operator to take full control of the system, Energy Minister Chris Bowen warned the NSW energy grid would be under “significant pressure” on Thursday night, but in Queensland there were no immediate threats of rolling blackouts.
As of Thursday afternoon, 82 per cent of Queensland’s coal-fired power capacity was available after a generation unit each at Callide Power ­Station and Millmerran Power Station came back online.
Two units at Queensland’s oldest and largest power station in Gladstone and Callide Unit C4 – which exploded last year – remained offline.
Callide C3, which had undergone planned maintenance through April, was taken offline last Friday due to an ­inverter issue, but the state-owned 400MW unit has since returned to service.
Meanwhile, a unit at Millmerran Power Station that had undergone maintenance for longer than planned due to inclement weather was also reactivated – doubling the output of the InterGen owned facility to 850MW.
The energy crisis hitting Australia’s eastern seaboard and South Australia has been sparked by a mix of factors, including an unusual number of coal-fired units going offline, a cold snap, and the war in Ukraine causing prices of coal and gas to rise.
The Australian Energy Market Operator, referee of the ­nation’s electricity market, was forced to shut down the system after it became “impossible to operate” days after putting in place a price cap on power to protect consumers. Instead of feeding power into the grid at a loss, the generators waited to be tapped on the shoulder – a move that triggered a complex compensation system that proved better for business.
NSW Treasurer Matt Kean blasted a number of energy generators for trying to “game the system” and slammed them for “putting profits above people”.
Queensland’s Energy Minister Mick de Brenni said the state’s publicly-owned generators bid in the market to “cover generation costs” and any further earnings were given back to Queenslanders.
Mr Bowen lashed out at claims coal was the answer to the nation’s electricity woes. “The problem is there is not enough investment in renewable energy. There hasn’t been enough investment in storage,” he said. “Yes, you can say the wind doesn’t always blow and the sun doesn’t always shine. The rain doesn’t always fall either, but we can store the water – and we can store renewable energy if we have investment.”
CREDIT: MADURA MCCORMACK
Word count: 435
