Viewpoint
The majority of Australians are touched by the impact of mental health in some way and there is no doubt the past few years have been some of the most challenging in recent history. Many live with the burden of anxiety or depression, or care for a loved one. Too many in our communities have been lost.
There are thousands of people working tirelessly to make a difference to the mental health of Australians and they should be recognised for their leadership.
This is the goal of the Australian Mental Health Prize, established by UNSW Sydney to acknowledge those who are doing innovative work in areas such as advocacy, research or community service. Nominations are open - until August 1 - and we strongly encourage people across the country to help us to honour the mental health heroes in our community.
More information and nomination forms can be obtained from australianmentalhealthprize.org.au.
For those living with the burden of mental illness every day, thank you for your support.
Lucy Brogden AM and Professor Allan Fels OA, Australian Mental Health Prize advisory group co-chairs. NUCLEAR OPTION CONSIDERED The debate about future and current power sources always focuses on the negatives of coal sourced energy, highlights the advantages of wind and solar power, but ignores the benefits or faults of either option.
Wind and solar power sources are an intermittent supply, which is highly dependent on climatic conditions, blowing wind and sunny days, and is rendered totally ineffective at night and on calm days.
Storage capacity, essential for renewable energy to be viable, at present is very limited and will remain so for the foreseeable future.
While base load power is essential to maintain our present living standards and may always be necessary, alternative generation sources and increased storage capacity are required and need to be developed further and introduced.
Nuclear power generation is one alternative, used successfully overseas, but seems to be off limits in Australia - even though we have some of the largest uranium deposits in the world. Without a viable and dependable base load power network, Australia will be doomed to being a mere consumer of imported products rather than a producer of them and our living costs will continue to spiral. For our economic future, it is time to make a decisive decision on nuclear power - one that is supported by all politicians and their parties.
Ian Macgowan, Ceduna. BORDER SECURITY LIMITED On the way to Cape York, Qld, there is a quarantine checkpoint for vehicles coming south to check that no fruit, meat or livestock potentially carrying the serious diseases such as rabies, foot and mouth that are endemic in PNG and other northern neighbours can spread into Australia.
The officer on duty gave us a talk, and showed a video outlining these diseases and what we should avoid bringing back. The previous staff of two have been cut to one. Not only that but when our coach driver returned south on Saturday morning, the station was closed. It would appear this vital checkpoint is only manned five days a week, and probably closed at night also, making it totally useless. We flew back to Cairns. There was no check there about what we were carrying with us.
Michael Burgess, Bongaree, Qld.
CREDIT:
Word count: 548
