Letter to the Editor
The increasing prevalence of biosecurity threats and incursions emphasises how important it is we, as a state, remain alert and vigilant. As we continue to fight outbreaks of fruit fly in the Riverland, the contagious foot and mouth and lumpy skin diseases are sweeping Indonesia and varroa mite has reached Australia's shores, threatening beekeepers and the broader agricultural sector.
The effects of a varroa outbreak has the potential to be devastating. Not only would it directly impact our beekeepers, but bees are also essential pollination services. PIRSA has estimated the value of pollinated crops in SA is $1.7 billion from honeybee pollination, and in 2014 estimated the impact to SA of a varroa mite incursion could be up to $410 million, with some facilities closed and inevitable job losses - close to $490m in 2022 terms. This would flow through to the cost of food production, placing unwelcomed pressure on the cost-of-living.
The opening of Australia's borders post-COVID and the resulting increased movement of people, goods and produce, has heightened the risk of transporting hazardous biosecurity threats into our country. While we shouldn't be alarmed, we must be alert and vigilant. It is also critical our state and federal governments ensure PIRSA, the federal Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and the Australian Border Force are adequately resourced to prevent, mitigate and respond to any incursions.
Nicola Centofanti MLC, Primary Industries opposition spokesperson. OTHER SIDE OF EMISSIONS At a recent meeting addressed by Professor Ian Plimer, the audience at Keith was treated to another side of the emission debate. The professor acknowledged the vast inland area of Australia with a sparse population. Much of our exports are derived from these areas requiring hefty transport costs to reach ports for export. Emission restrictions would impact heavily on export revenue - thousands of jobs would be threatened.
Activists claim that renewable energy is cheaper than power from coal or gas but they overlook the subsidies applied to solar and wind power. Prof Plimer reminded his audience the so-called villain of carbon dioxide was essential for plant life to survive.
The most important point showed the emission activists could rest easy because Australia has already reached the status of "Net Zero". In fact we are in credit. The average annual per capita emission is 20 tonnes. For every Australian there are 30 hectares of forest, 74ha of grassland and each hectare sequesters about 1t of carbon dioxide. It appears the emission story is more about controlling people and their activities.
Ken Grundy, Naracoorte. NUCLEAR SAFETY NEEDED Taking note of the opinion of Ian Macgowan (Stock Journal, June 23), there can be no question about the ability to provide power for many resources by using nuclear energy but a big question remains. How do we safely dispose of the the waste, which even for mid-level nuclear waste, can have a half life of several thousand years while it remains a dangerous substance capable of serious pollution? As the ongoing nuclear waste issue at Kimba has shown, those in control of finding a safe disposal site will often opt for expediency over common sense and public safety. In dealing with any nuclear waste, we must not create problems for future generations to resolve.
Bryan Lock, Iron Knob.
CREDIT:
Word count: 547
