It's not just big seasons and big agricultural commodity prices fuelling record levels of spending in the bush.
Farmers are looking to the efficiency gains and long term dividends set to flow from re-calibrating their enterprises for a somewhat greener decade ahead.
Notably, family farms are adopting investment goals with the sort of strategic zeal previously more often associated with corporate agricultural growth agendas.
With almost three quarters of Australia's family farmers saying they are making more money than a decade ago, agribusiness bankers attribute some of those gains to producers investing in new technology, labour-saving equipment, more efficient machinery and greater economies of scale.
Further incentivising producers to invest has been sustainability demands coming from the marketplace and wider community.
Reflecting that sentiment, a recent Westpac survey of family-owned farming businesses found 61 per cent of respondents wanted sustainable farming initiatives to be better recognised with more official accreditation.
Meanwhile, bank lending incentives have emerged to reward farmers' improved environmental goals, encouraging them to spend on more emissions-friendly equipment and land management strategies.
Commonwealth Bank of Australia recently launched a discounted Agri Green loan pitched at helping farmers invest in environmentally beneficial projects ranging from farm shelter belts and soil improvement initiatives, to more fuel efficient machinery, solar powered pumps and batteries, or improving water use efficiency.
Canberra's Clean Energy Finance Corporation has also just teamed up with the ANZ Banking Group to offer loans of up to $5 million at a 0.5pc discounted business rates for borrowers investing in assets to cut greenhouse gas emissions, including precision farming gear and renewable energy equipment, or making energy efficiency upgrades.
A potential indication of Westpac's plans has emerged in New Zealand where it is piloting a new sustainable finance loan for farming customers "to align its banking operations with a net zero emissions future".
The discounted ag sustainability pilot loan requires customer to meet a criteria on reducing emissions, improving long-term resilience, more sustainable water use, waste and ecosystems.
Commonwealth's Agri Green loan began as a pilot concept last year.
CBA's agribusiness banking executive general manager Paul Fowler said it reflected how the society-wide push for more sustainability was creating fresh agribusiness opportunities to help farm efficiency, resilience and long term productivity.
Officially launched in August at a 3.99pc interest rate (now 4.74pc), Agri Green loans can be meshed with property lending if environmental projects are planned for new land acquisitions
"Our customers wanted us to play a role in supporting their sustainability ambitions," Mr Fowler said.
"It's giving farmers the chance to bring strategic, financial and environmental goals into one package in a very handy combination."
The first loan went to northern Vic glasshouse tomato producers, the Van Den Goor family, who replaced diesel power with bioenergy and invested in more efficient lighting and heating at the 1200 square metre Katunga Fresh operation.
Agri Green follows last year's CBA launch of sustainability linked loan deals where enterprises get special rates if they commit to lowering carbon emissions via methane, carbon and energy reduction initiatives and also meet other performance goals such as workplace safety improvements.
Westpac's intergenerational farming report found 77pc of Australian farmers were optimistic about the future while three quarters felt there were "unlimited opportunities" for younger generations in their family business in the future.
Westpac agribusiness general manager Steve Hannan said the research found old and new generations were mostly on the same page on crucial industry issues from climate action to infrastructure needs and supporting their rural communities.
At the same time, 72pc of family farms had introduced and increased new farming practices in the past decade.
"The way they are governed and set up, family farms are becoming bigger in scale and are running more like corporates," he said.
Increased farm size was most notable in SA where 82pc of families expanded their farm area in the past 10 years.
Highest profitability gains were recorded by 95pc of Tas farm families, followed by the NT (88pc), Qld (81pc) and WA (80pc).
CREDIT: Andrew Marshall
Word count: 670
