Letters to the Editor
Shame, Despair, Action How despondent many of us feel about this election, the deeply heart-felt need to have a different government greets a mostly insipid, uninspiring 'on message' campaign?
Many Australians are pained and ashamed by the treatment of refugees, despairing of the climate denialism and inaction that ultimately cause more and more suffering in bushfires, storms and floods, worried about the current international conflict not to mention the national failure to support transition for workers in dying industries, and the shameful neglect of people in aged care atop the continuous eruption of scandals, dishonesty and diplomatic incompetence.
Doing nothing just now doesn't feel like an option when I think about the possibility of waking up to more of the same on 22 May. So, for me, taking thoughtful action is an antidote to despair and helps to generate optimism.
Jenny Barrett, Apollo Bay Federal election Dear Mallee Voters, Scott Morrison maintained one of the most brutal lies of Australian politics - that people had to be locked up to save lives at sea.
It was political abuse of the worst kind. Most of the refugees have finally been let out, many after ten years in prison, because they no longer serve any political purpose. Two hundred and twenty are still in detention.
Billions of dollars have been spent to keep this lie alive. Untold numbers of lives have been destroyed. Those who made it to Australia before the detention lock-ups, aren't much better off. Thousands of them are living in limbo, and have been for ten years, many still on Temporary Protection Visas. Yet most of them have worked full-time for the entire period, despite having been told, "You are an illegal arrival. (They are not) You will never be a citizen. You will never get your families out here to safety. You will never be welcome in Australia."
Ann Webster has supported this cruel mantra when approached for help. Show her she does not speak for you and put her LAST on the ballot paper.
Janet Field, Swan Hill CFAs miss out but fire services Numerous CFA stations will miss out on upgrades this year, while the Labor Government rakes in $800 million from the fees you pay to the fire services property levy.
Analysis of the State Budget papers confirm that just $7.6 million will be spent on new asset infrastructure for Victoria's Country Fire Authority in 2022-23 (State Capital Program, p27).
It is scraps off the table for country fire brigades, too many of which will now spend at least another 12 months battling sub-standard facilities that aren't fit-for-purpose.
Labor's under-investment in the volunteer fire services shows its priorities are all wrong. It risks leaving our country communities exposed and under-prepared at our time of greatest need. The kicker is that while CFA volunteers miss out, the Andrews Labor Government has been forced to admit cost blowouts on its mismanaged major projects have now increased to $28.1 billion.
Imagine what those funds could have done for our country fire brigades.
Under-investing in country emergency services puts country lives at risk.
Peter Walsh, Leader of The Nationals Buffer 5 km from wind turbines Our Federal Government needs to support a Buffer between brolga habitat and New wind Turbines to help stop the extinction of the rare Southern Brolga, with a population of about 200 breading pairs.
I have contact all the candidates for the federal election as Brolgas do not stick to the Federal Boundaries. I asked for their intention to support the Southern Brolga to be included as an EPBC protected Species. And also apply a 5km buffer between wind turbines and brolga habitat.
I have only had five discussions or replies to date: Wannon: Craig Kensen (United Australia Party), Ballarat: Ben Green (Liberal), Hawke: Glenn Vassey (Citizens Party), Mallee: Sophie Baldwin (Independent) and Hawke: Jarrod Bingham (Independent).
Eric Cumming, Darlington Climate Change Our Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, is constantly saying that the coming Federal Government election is all about jobs and the economy and yet the go slow policies of the Federal Coalition Government, in relation to countering climate change and further developing the attributes of renewable energy, have been constant inhibitors to growth in jobs and the economy for many years.
Urgent action is required, and well overdue, in relation to countering climate change and further developing renewable energy.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, South Australia
CREDIT: Ben Fraser
Word count: 738
