A leading Melbourne researcher says the best way the livestock and red meat industry can compete against alternative or complementary proteins is to focus on nutritional advantages rather than environmental issues.
Monash University Adjunct Professor Paul Wood has led research and development teams for the CSIRO, CSL and Pfizer Animal Health and was recently announced as a recipient of the Eureka Prize.
Prof Wood was speaking at last week's Southern Australia Livestock Research Council Livestock 2022 Big Issues - New Partnerships conference in Melbourne on the growth of alternative proteins and their impact on red meat.
"We get a lot of people who just want to hammer us about greenhouse gas," he said.
"There are a few other things we have to worry about and the first one is nutrition.
"There are other products out there, but when they are trying to match the nutrition animal products produce - match is the best they can possibly do."
He said the industry had to start talking more about its products from the point of nutritional values, shifting the debate away from the sector's environmental footprint.
"We will always be better off when you look at the nutritional value (of red meat) because we outstrip (alternative proteins) on so many nutritional profiles," he said.
He said the companies that dominated the red meat industry were at the forefront of developing alternative and complementary proteins.
"They don't really mind what you eat, as long as you buy it from them," Prof Wood said.
"You will hear people say JBS has just put $100 million into cell-based meat, in reality it's a side bet.
"In case the technology works, they want to be in control.
"We are not changing control of the food industry."
He said it was true alternative protein products were making inroads into the market, with the pea-based V2 burger sold through fast-food outlet Hungry Jacks and supermarkets, hitting price parity with meat.
But he said plant-based meats made up only 1.4 per cent of American sales.
"It's minute, compared with the overall market," he said.
He said there was an emerging challenge from cell-based meats - "the new kids on the block".
It is produced using animal cells and a combination of biotechnology, tissue engineering, molecular biology and synthetic processes, such as fermentation.
But he said the cost of the media (in which to grow publicity of the products), supplements and electricity costs had to be added to the price of a "decent-sized" manufacturing facility, which would cost at least US$400 million to build.
"It's an energy-intensive industry, you have to filter the air, sterilise the water," he said.
Prof Wood said Oxford University studies had shown if renewable energy was not used, the plants were not sustainable.
"The cost of manufacture has to come down 1000-fold from where it is today, for them to be anywhere close (to parity)," he said.
Another issue was scaling the technology up, to become commercially viable.
"This is one of the reasons why I am a sceptic about this," he said.
He said plant-based companies were also at odds with each other.
Impossible Burge had 'haem', which gave it the smell of meat when cooked and the "bleeding, the juiciness" while cooking.
"They compete heavily with Beyond Burgers and Beyond says to Impossible 'you've got a genetically-modified organism or haem (in your burger)," he said. "The Europeans say they can't bring that product to Europe - they are now selling product in Europe but taking haem out.
"They are taking their magic ingredient out."
He was also sceptical about claims alternative and complimentary proteins would substantially help to feed the growing population of the world, which was predicted to increase most in Africa.
He said new technologies would essentially "feed middle-class, wealthy, western society".
"But we are not going to do too much for where that growing population is," he said.
CREDIT: Andrew Miller
Word count: 651
