The operator announced the decision at 2pm across the east coast.
“AEMO has determined that it is necessary to suspend the spot market in all regions … because it has become impossible to operate the spot market in accordance with provisions of the rules,” it said.
AEMO chief Daniel Westerman said it had become “impossible to operate the system under current conditions while ensuring reliable, secure supply of electricity to Australian homes and businesses”.
That prompted the market operator to suspend the market for the first time nationally since it was created.
Mr Westerman said the market operator would now have “true visibility” about what generators could provide power, rather than “relying on last-minute interventions” to keep the lights on.
He warned that “conditions remain tight in the coming days”, particularly in NSW where consumers are being urged to conserve energy where it is safe to do so.
Asked if the national electricity market was broken beyond repair, Mr Westerman said: “What we’re seeing is very challenging times, and right now, it would seem the market is not able to deal with all the factors that have been thrown at it.”
“We’ll restart the market once we’re confident the market will operate,” he said.
He urged generators to act “in good faith” in coming days.
The radical move follows days of chaos in which the market operator has had to direct generators to come online, after they did not bid their power into the market because of a cap on wholesale prices.
The move is the biggest intervention AEMO can make.
It means they will run the system themselves instead of allowing the market to determine who is online and how much they’re paid.
The Australian Energy Council, the peak body for energy generators, welcomed the decision.
“It is quite clear that in these unprecedented circumstances and following the application of the administered price cap the power system was becoming unmanageable,” chief Sarah McNamara said.
“We hope the conditions improve in this new phase and we can soon return to an uncapped market.”
In a statement, Mr Westerman said it was no longer possible to reliably operate the power system through the normal market mechanisms.
“In the current situation, suspending the market is the best way to ensure a reliable supply of electricity for Australian homes and businesses,” he said.
“The situation in recent days has posed challenges to the entire energy industry, and suspending the market would simply operations during significant outages across the energy supply chain.”
The market suspension will be reviewed daily for each state in the national market.
“We are confident today’s actions will deliver the best outcomes for Australian consumers, and as we return to normal conditions, the market-based system will once again deliver value to homes and businesses,” Mr Westerman said.
Victoria is facing a further potential power shortfall on Wednesday, even after generators were asked to bring more electricity online.
The energy market operator has issued a new notice flagging a shortfall in Victoria from 5.30pm to 6pm on Wednesday, with NSW and Queensland again facing similar issues.
At 1.30pm Wednesday, the market operator warned of a series of further shortfalls in Victoria on Wednesday night and throughout Thursday.
The biggest is a predicted 2082-megawatt gap at 3pm on Thursday.
The market operator is continuing to work with generators to bring on more supply to prevent enforced outages.
Power outages were avoided earlier after generators were directed to offer their electricity to the market.
The market operator is continuing to work with generators to bring more power online, despite a cap on wholesale prices that has caused chaos.
The Herald Sun understands authorities remain confident Victoria will avoid enforced blackouts, although the situation has been compounded by the unexpected loss of half the capacity at the Yallourn coal-fired power station for a week.
The power station is one of the country’s major coal plants and provides 20 per cent of Victoria’s electricity needs.
Officials believe there is almost 4000 megawatts of electricity supply sitting on the sidelines of the market, and the Australian Energy Regulator on Tuesday took the unprecedented step of writing to generators suggesting some may be withholding power to manipulate pricing.
The AER has demanded generators meet their obligation to keep capacity in the market despite a $300MWh price cap.
That was widened to include Victoria and South Australia on Tuesday in a bid to control spiking prices.
Labor Minister Jacinta Allan on Wednesday maintained Victoria had an “adequate power supply”.
“I think it’s a little premature to speculate on what action might be taken in the future because the advice we have right now is there is adequate supply for Victorians,” she said.
“There is undoubtedly pressure on our energy supply… we also should remember though that we are in the midst of a global energy crisis.
“Global market is experiencing instability with the consequences of the war in Eastern Europe and other factors.”
Ms Allan said reducing emissions and switching to renewable energy should be at the centre of policy making.
“Victoria has for a number of years increased our investment in renewable energies,” she said.
“That’s why we have moved so hard… on projects like solar on rooftops.”
Ms Allan said the state had “suffered nine years of inaction and inadequate leadership” from the previous federal government.
“It’s at the national table that we now need to have these important conservations about both supply and how we continue to push to get increased renewable energy investment into our system … and what some of the legacy issues are that come from our reliance on a coal power system,” she said.
Energy Minister Chris Bowen, warned there would not be a short-term solution to the crisis, which has been caused by a sharp ­reduction in the amount of coal generation available and a cold snap across the eastern states. He has requested households reduce non-essential electricity use.
“I expect most of those things would have been turned off ­already because power bills are so high,” Mr Bowen said.
“So swimming pool filters, swimming pool heaters and outside lighting … There is a general request that the market is tight and if they can be turned off then that would be ­useful.”
Warning for ‘bumpy’ winter
Victoria avoided enforced power outages on Tuesday, but authorities are warning of a “bumpy” winter ahead for the power network along the east coast.
A shortfall was forecast on Tuesday night after a cap on wholesale prices kicked in for the first time in more than a decade, prompting generators to pull their power out of the market.
On Wednesday morning, the market operator said it had successfully directed generators to come online to avoid shortfalls across the east coast.
It said it was continuing to encourage generators to bid into the market and respond to their notices warning of a lack of reserves, rather than waiting to be directed to bring more power online.
Mr Bowen said he was “very pleased that we have been able to avoid so far any significant load shedding events or blackouts”.
“AEMO advises me that will likely to continue to be the case,” he said.
“Of course, that is subject to any unexpected outages in the system.”
Mr Bowen said the market operator had his full support to intervene in the market “very heavily”, having directed more than 5000 megawatts of power to come online on Tuesday.
The energy giants are now under the microscope of the regulator as they face accusations of gaming the system.
The Australian Energy Market Operator was forced to direct generators to come online in Queensland and NSW in an effort to avoid outages on Tuesday night.
The market operator would otherwise turn to “load shedding” as a last resort, which means power would be cut in certain parts of the state for a limited period of time.
The market operator expects the wholesale price cap to remain in place for the coming days, after costs soared as a result of outages at coal-fired generators.
But Grattan Institute energy program director Tony Wood said it was not tenable to continue relying on the “circuit-breaker” measure if it meant generators had to keep being directed to put their power into the grid, receiving extra compensation as a result.
“If they’re going to go through this peculiar dance every day for the next few weeks, that’s crazy … It was never designed to do that,” he said.
“Following the rules of the market when the market can’t respond doesn’t help very much. If this is to continue and it’s not fixing itself, then maybe something more interventionist is necessary.”
Victorian Energy Minister Lily D’Ambrosio said when the price cap kicked in, the state lost 2000 megawatts of power from the market.
She said there had been “some strange behaviour” from the energy giants.
“We want to make sure that there isn’t any gaming going on and the way that we need to look into that is through the regulator,” she said.
“Certainly no one likes the situation that we’re seeing now. We’ve been told and assured by the market operator that there is more than sufficient power in Victoria available.”
“I am very confident and the market operator’s very confident that generators will step forward and provide power which in fact, they actually do have.”
AUSTRALIA’S ENERGY CRISIS — YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED
Word count: 1504
