The Age has put this question to Australians across the nation – people of varying ages and backgrounds who will vote in the May election. Here’s what they had to say …
NATAGE A016 16 THE AGE MONDAY, APRIL 11, 2022 AUSTRALIA VOTES ANEWS V 2022 Chris Bevernage, 53 Brighton, VIC Quality assurance manager “I want the next government to take action on the environment and climate change ...More renewable energy and charging stations for cars, and better bike infrastructures so that we get out of our cars and into cycling.”Natalie Glassey, 50 Bulimba, QLD Nanny “There needs to be more funding for hospitals and education.My daughter is a teacher, and there aren’t enough staff and the workload is huge. She also just had a baby, so we saw how chaotic the hospitals are.It’s really hard for them [the workers], because it [the health system] is so strained.”Muntadher Shuhani Ultimo NSW Barber “I’m hoping to see changes for the thousands of refugee people in Australia who didn’t get permanent residency and haven’t been able to see their family. They don’t have a proper life. Is this not the human rights people are fighting for, that the government is fighting for?” Kate Fitzgerald, 24 Whitegum Valley, WA Game master at Escape Hunt Fremantle “I would love to see action on climate change; there is only so much time left. I also would like to see a focus on women’s rights and action towards equality for all genders.”Eymard Tungatalum, 68 Tiwi Islands, NT Artist “I’d like to see much more financial support for the arts sector. It’s important to me to see much more support for Indigenous artists.”Jayden Sheridan, 27 Elwood, VIC Not-for-profit youth group “I want to see more support for youth mental health, and support for youth in the limbo period between school and not fitting into the educational box.”John Douglas, 76 Launceston, TAS Retired school teacher “I would like to see better leadership - politicians who are honest and who don’t fudge their answers, with long-term policies, not flash-in-the-pan promises to win elections or gain popularity. And there should be positive action on climate change. The government is not doing enough to promote alternative energies.”Sagan-Indiana Culph, 29 Footscray, VIC Bartender “Support low-income people to buy a home with a 5 per cent deposit. It’s almost impossible for most people to buy their first home.People our age can’t get into the housing market, and it’s just Boomers taking advantage of us and making us pay their mortgages. More initiatives for lower deposits to encourage young people to see that it is an achievable goal.”Nathan March, 45 Flagstaff Hill, SA Support worker “I want a government that is going to do something about Australia’s emissions, that addresses housing inequality and the structural problems around housing, that really works towards redistribution of income, that lifts wages, and deals with tax evasion by the top end.”Eloise Parker, 25 Paddington, QLD Engineer “Public transport needs to be improved because Brisbane’s system is nowhere near as good as what it is in Melbourne and other cities.”Dominic Moscatello, 65 Mill Park, VIC Retired banker “I’d like to see support for small business.Walking around here [Preston’s Northland shopping centre] and seeing so many stalls having disappeared from the centre is very disheartening. I would like encouragement from the government to bring them back and earn a living.”Lucy Whitehead, 44 Glen Huon, TAS Adult literacy and numeracy teacher “Environment, environment, environment. Bring in a refund deposit scheme for every state. Ban single-use plastics. Bring in subsidies and other incentives for people to switch to electric vehicles and other environmentally friendly technology. Subsidise and incentivise research and development to reduce carbon emissions.”Chantel Gibson, 31 Epping, VIC Children’s photographer “I would like to see them really crack down on a lot of crime in Epping. There are a lot of spots … that are not on CCTV … I wouldn’t feel safe walking alone at night. I would love for that to change.”Angelo Kawac, 30 Frankston, VIC Builder “We need more community stuff for kids and teenagers to use. More services for young people and to make Frankston actually look like a beach.”Dushani Maduka, 35 Wagaman, NT Unemployed “The government should consider immigrants looking for permanent residency. They should look at us in a more sympathetic way. They should speed up approval of visa applications for immigrants who have been waiting for more than two years.”Peter Mitchell, 57 Geelong, VIC IT consultant “I would like action on climate change. What I want is evidence that the government cares about its citizens …. whether that’s climate change or the economy, aged support, even disaster relief.”Akriti Bhattarai, 32 Boondall, QLD Hospitality “Commuting takes double the time. They need to cut the toll costs and there is no incentive for people to catch public transport as it costs the same.”Leslie Frost, 68 Howden, TAS Retired public servant “I want true commitment to tackling climate change through serious investment in green energy, and no new coal mines, gas or oil drilling. Full disclosure of donations as well as a cap on donations and election spending. I hate the way the election is about personalities rather than policies.”Kumbie Chiareki, 32 Palmerston, NT Accountant “It’s important we see more opportunities for culturally and linguistically diverse people. In particular, I would like to see greater representation of this in the political space.”Mariam Soueid, 57 Greenvale, VIC Kindy daycare “The cost of living is going up. We would like to see improvement there and to put caps on petrol, for instance.That’s causing empty shelves in the supermarkets. I’d also like to see a real increase in wages.”Hannah Taberner Camperdown, NSW Retail worker “I saw that the Greens have a policy of free university education.I thought that was really cool. I’m definitely interested in that because I do not want to be in debt for the rest of my life.”Beth Jackson, 26 Thornbury, VIC University student “I would like the next government to transition into full renewable energy and get rid of the anti-union laws that have systematically undermined workers for many years.”Mayah Salter, 21 Willunga, SA Filmmaker “I would like more action on climate change, and more action around sexual harassment and assault - broader education about it in schools and universities. And lowering the cost of living - so I can finally move out.”Clive Buultjens Guildford, NSW Anglican minister “Australia hasn’t been as generous as other countries to refugees.We make deals with other countries like New Zealand and Indonesia to resettle refugees when our national anthem says we have boundless plains to share. It’s not like [refugees] are going to be a drain on the system - they can actually do meaningful work and contribute to society.”Andrew Connor, 45 Launceston, TAS Computer engineer “A new fibre-optic connection is desperately needed for Tasmania. Right now, all internet in Tasmania is connected by a couple of threads from the mainland across Bass Strait.It’s a big-ticket item, but an extra connection is crucial for the local economy.”Wendy Hughes, 73 Sunshine, VIC Retired teacher “I would like the Labor government to be successful. And I would like them to do something about the state of aged care. The government needs to help older people who have helped to build this country and who have worked hard all their lives, and make sure they can be looked after with dignity.”Shyamala Vishnumohan, 40 Perth, WA Food scientist and prenatal dietician “Migration policies to reunite with our parents need to be transparent, fast and affordable. The migrant community understands the vital role family plays in providing a strong foundation and support for the individual to flourish and contribute positively to society.”Harsh Bains, 40 Epping, VIC Tea business “I would really like the next government to expedite the process of the infrastructure around Melbourne, especially having a train station at Melbourne Airport that connects you to the city and various suburbs.”Amy Compton, 45 Coningham, TAS Artist “Strong and urgent action on climate change is the number one priority for me.Other top issues are affordable housing for all Australians, big taxes for billionaires, and decent funding for the arts and culture sector.”Dale Pearce, 65 Bendigo, VIC Principal of Bendigo Senior Secondary College “I would like to see an accountable government that is focused on making Australia more equal. I feel we’re becoming a nation of haves and have-nots, and leaving a lot of people and kids behind. I’d like to see a government that offers more equal distribution of opportunities in life.”Claire Swensen Mascot, NSW Nurse “Nurses are doing doubles after doubles [double shifts]. Half of us can’t even strike because you can’t leave sick patients.We’re getting so tired. Sometimes we’re like, ‘Can someone just send someone from the government down to see what it’s actually like?’ Give us more money to hire more nurses.”Rachel Johnson, 34 Port Melbourne, VIC Fabricator (creates ceramic equipment for labs) “I want the next government to be stable, to be honest and to just be strong in what they say.”John Dunstan, 66 Moreton Bay, QLD Shop assistant “There needs to be more support for the lower-paid workers and trying to help out aged care workers. Wages are not really keeping up. Also, juvenile crime - there needs to be more funding for police.”Danielle Pederson, 18 Bentleigh, VIC University student “I would love to see an increase in attention and investment towards aged care facilities, which care for the elderly like our family members ... and more support and acknowledgement for nurses and aged care workers. Also more investment in our climate because that’s really important to us as young Australians.”Jack Meredith Macquarie Park Student teacher “Teaching is easily the hardest job I’ve ever had. We need better pay. I also heard the shadow minister for education talking about how they’re putting $14 million into incorporating Indigenous teachers into the classrooms of 60 schools. That would be really good.”Alice Murdoch, 27 Perth, WA Lawyer “Existential threat and misinformation are a dangerous combination. That’s why I’m looking for a complete rehaul of Australia’s climate change policy and media laws in the next federal election.”Q:Whatdoyouwant from the next federal government? INTERVIEWS AND PHOTOS: Victoria: Najma Sambul, Nell Geraets. NSW: Angus Dalton, Flavio Brancaleone, Steve Siewert. Queensland: Jocelyn Garcia, Cloe Read.South Australia: Walter Marsh. Tasmania: Nina Hendy. Northern Territory: Helen Orr. Western Australia: Peter de Kruijff, Sarah Brookes, Holly Thompson, Hamish Hastie.
CREDIT:
Word count: 1729
