Crowd concerns AMUSING to read those in the AFL hierarchy are scratching their collective heads over the exodus of paying spectators to their grossly overpriced venues.
Even before we were paying at least $9 for a single head of lettuce, the extortionate prices inside AFL venues have been enough to cause spectators to vote with their feet.
Don’t even get me started on the cost of beer, pies or sandwiches at Adelaide Oval.
Please, punters, if you do go back to these AFL venues in bigger numbers, take your own food and drinks.
If we starve these greedy grabbers of our hard-earned cash, at some point, the penny may drop and they might start asking: “Are our prices too high?” Don’t hold your breath on that one, but we have to make an effort here. Because we should be able to take the family to the footy without almost having to take out a personal loan in order to do so, don’t you think?
MARK TAYLOR, Somerton Park Quotas will work REX Jory may well argue that the state Liberal Party would be engaging in discrimination if it introduced a quota system aimed at getting more women into winnable seats (“Choose candidates on merit alone or it is discrimination”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Selecting candidates other than on merit alone does not sit well with many people.
But the trouble with this argument is that, until the Liberals back up words with deeds, they will continue to look like a male-dominated institution of years long past.
At the moment the state Liberal Party does not present itself as a modern organisation which promotes gender equity.
Until the party achieves a critical mass of women in the parliament it will struggle to attract high-quality female candidates, let alone attracting female voters.
Quotas may not be a perfect solution but they are a means to a desirable end result. Introduce quotas and then leave no stone unturned to seek out candidates to seek preselection for the next election.
GUY MUDIE, Highgate Charity cash I AGREE completely with Mark Thompson (“Funding for PNG”, The Advertiser, Monday).
I volunteer on a medic ship in Papua New Guinea, organised by Youth with a Mission.
All the volunteers are self-funded.
It would be good if the costs we bear could be tax deductible. (It would not help me, as a semi retiree.) Or they could be otherwise subsidised, as we are doing work that adds value to the government money that is used for humanitarian aid.
It would also increase the number of people volunteering, if the cost was somehow reduced.
In this way it can increase humanitarian aid without somehow becoming politically sensitive.
Anyone who has been to PNG will realise the dire need to improve health outcomes, particularly in rural and village areas, which comprise 85 per cent of the population.
Programs such as Mark describes, such as training midwives and nurses, are a boon to those they can reach, with simple measures that we take for granted providing much-improved outcomes.
MARCO DI GIROLAMO, Athelstone State-owned rail I WAS heartened to see Transport Minister Tom Koutsantonis wearing his appropriately coloured red shirt at the ceremony marking the first run of the electrified Gawler rail line.
Responding to an interviewer’s question, he remarked that public transport should be in the hands of the state government and he aimed to make it so.
I wonder if the minister could apply the same rationale to our electricity and gas supplies, and also make it so?
JOHN SCARDIGNO, Adelaide MP gone quiet RUSS Hewes congratulated Premier Peter Malinauskas “for hitting the ground running and committing to fulfil some of his promises” (“Working together”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Before the state election in March, my Labor candidate filled our letterbox with campaign material almost daily.
Images of her looking off into the distance were plastered on corflutes everywhere.
At the election, with the widespread swing to Labor, she defeated the hardworking Liberal incumbent.
About three months have now passed. I have not heard anything from our MP, nor have I seen or heard any mention in media.
A charitable view may be that she too has hit the ground running and consequently she has been too busy to communicate with her constituents.
A less charitable view may be that, with Labor’s significant majority, she may be comfortable to quietly occupy her seat on the backbench while collecting her salary.
Whichever may be the case, due to her lack of public exposure, I have forgotten her name already.
HUGH K. TAEUBER, Colonel Light Gardens Energy levy IT seems gas is going to be part of the transition to renewable energy for some time.
I suggest we place a levy (not a tax) on the gas companies. Most of them are primarily foreign owned and pay little tax anyway.
The levy could be used to fund the strengthening, or rebuilding, of the energy grid so we can cheaply and widely distribute the renewable sources of energy with which we are so richly endowed.
Then we can meet our zero emissions targets even before 2050 and phase out gas as well. LESLEY BRETAG, Warradale
Word count: 860
