Australia’s energy sector is evolving at a breakneck pace. But what will become of the communities that underpin it?
As you motor along the shores of Lake Macquarie, the twin chimneys of Eraring Power Station, 200m tall, are visible above the coastal scrub for many kilometres, like a pair of horns. And then you drive up and over a hill and the whole behemoth comes into view, sprawled over a great chunk of the valley. Everything about it is supersized. The hall housing the four massive steam-driven turbines is 800m long; it's so big that workers use bicycles to get around. The shed that adjoins it, housing the boiler furnaces, is 30 storeys high and ravenous. Coal is fed to it from nearby collieries. Each year these furnaces burn through more than six million tonnes of coal - in the summer peaks it devours the equivalent of a thousand truckloads a day. It's thirsty work; a concrete canal, two kilometres long and flowing like a river in flood, draws in 11 billion litres of salt water each day from Lake Macquarie to cool the superheated steam. Megalitres of fresh water are turned into steam to drive the turbines. At times this plant, 120km north of Sydney, has supplied more than a quarter of NSW's power. Australia has a couple of dozen coal-fired power stations - Eraring is the big daddy of them all. But soon these great furnaces will fizzle, the raging canal will run dry and the turbines will spin no more. It'll all be demolished and, on this site, they'll build a giant battery.
Frank Calabria, CEO of Origin Energy, which operates Eraring, tells me it was a market decision to bring forward by seven years the closure of the plant to mid-2025; it was simply unable to compete with the influx of cheap renewables, even though Eraring enjoys some incredible commercial advantages. It's perfectly located between Newcastle and Sydney, Australia's largest energy market, and so has minimal transmission costs. It buys coal at a heavily discounted rate from collieries in the next paddock and so it pays a fraction of what's paid for the same coal by power plants abroad.
Calabria is attempting to steer his company to be "focused on a world that will move towards zero emissions" by beefing up its investments in renewable energy, energy storage, pumped hydro and research into hydrogen. So is just about every other energy company around the world. The Indian conglomerate Adani - owner of the controversial Queensland mine - has become the world's largest solar operator.
But what will all this mean for those workers and communities that rely on thermal coal for their jobs and prosperity? The changes taking place right now on the shores of Lake Macquarie at Eraring, and the collieries that supply it, are a window into the future. Prime Minister Scott Morrison was recently on the hustings at a town hall meeting on the NSW Central Coast, not far from Eraring.
He said he wanted Australia's coal-fired power stations to "run as long as they can". But what if, like Eraring, they simply can't compete with greener, cheaper alternatives for much longer? What if the coal mines that supply those power stations can't pivot to become exporters? These workers, and their community, are the canaries in the coal mine.
Like so many who began their working life as apprentices at Eraring, Rob Smith has set himself up for a lifetime of financial security at an age when most people haven't saved for a deposit. The 29-year-old grew up on the NSW Central Coast and started work as an apprentice electrician at the power station straight from school. He has since gone on to get further qualifications and is now a specialist power station technician, a job that earns him a salary of about $150,000. "We deal with the computer control systems that run the joint," he tells me. "It's a pretty broad job and really interesting. I'm lucky - I'm someone who's always loved fixing things and now I come to work every day and that's what I do, fix things. There's always something broken."
Coal, and the electricity it generates, has long powered his family's prosperity. His dad, an electrician, works for a company that services the Vales Point and Bayswater plants. His mum was an electrician and she used to work at the Mount Piper Power Station outside Lithgow, in NSW's Central Tablelands. "And now my missus is an electrician as well." His wife Shelley works for a contractor that services Eraring. These good, solid jobs provided Rob and Shelley with the means to get into the real estate market at an early age, back before the market went ballistic. They own an investment property and are currently building a new house to live in, on a block at Murrays Beach.
With Lake Macquarie on one side and the ocean on the other, it's a stunning location and an ideal spot for the pair of keen surfers. But it will saddle them with a hefty mortgage.
With a big debt and an uncertain future you might think Rob Smith would be fretting about the imminent closure of Eraring. You'd be wrong.
"Three and a half years' notice - not many people get that," he says. "Most people rock up and find they haven't got a job in a couple of weeks. I am sure we can sort ourselves out in that time period."
He's upbeat about the future. He has skills and qualifications that are highly sought after.
Smith is proud of the work he does and the service it provides, powering the nation, but he believes the plant's closure is unavoidable. "I am frankly happy to see it become unnecessary," he says. "It is nice that we are moving to a point where, at least on paper, it is possible to go without [coal-fired power] ... burning coal is obviously not sustainable in the long term." He describes it as an "interesting conflict of interest" to be both concerned about global warming and working in a job that contributes to it. "We are still at the point where we need facilities like this for readily available access to energy ... so, what do you do? I don't have a single regret about working here and I have made some really good friends." He'll be sad to see it closed but the plant "is being put out of a job by better solutions".
This sanguine attitude is one I encounter among a number of workers I interview at Eraring. Charmaine Freeman, who's 45 and a mother of four, is a maintenance coordinator at the plant and has worked there for 10 years. Like Smith, she loves her job. "I'm not tied to any part of the plant," she says. "I cover the whole lot from the land management and seedling program, the indigenous land management program, the canteen, the security, the plumbers, the fences, backtracks ... lots of different things." She's not agonising about the future. "The reality is the world is aiming towards greener power," she says.
"So I'm not going to stress about things I can't control." She figures there'll be work for years after the plant is closed, rehabilitating the site.
And, over the next three and a half years, she intends to take up study and training opportunities being offered by the company. "I'm looking to do a double diploma in project management and leadership management," she says.
Her colleague Carl Malloy, 46, has been through all this before. The fitter and machinist was at BHP's Newcastle steelworks when it closed in 1999 and he took a redundancy. He then got a job at the Pasminco zinc and lead smelter on the shores of Lake Macquarie; it closed in 2003, not long after he started. He's been at Eraring for three and a half years and works as a maintenance leading hand. He knew when he took the job that the plant was scheduled to close in 2032. "It was a bit of a shock to hear it would be closing in three and a half years, but it wasn't out of the blue," he says.
Malloy will be 50 when the plant closes and while he has a trade, he hasn't been on the tools for 16 years. "At this stage I don't know what to do," he says. "Do I stay in the industry? Do I look for a whole new career? There are jobs about, but jobs earning the sort of money we do here are becoming few and far between ... the next three and a half years will be about setting myself up financially so that if I can't get a job that pays as well I'll be OK."
He says he's not concerned about climate change.
"If I was worried about climate change I wouldn't have worked in the industries I worked in."
His concern is that at the age of 50, when the plant closes, he could be fighting for the same jobs that hundreds of his colleagues will be applying for. Eraring employs 240 full-time staff.
A further 200 people are employed on site by contractors. Hundreds of miners from the two pits that supply it also face an uncertain future.
The early closure of Eraring in 2025, and what is seen as the inevitable closure of more power plants and coal mines in the future, will inflict deep wounds on regions such as the NSW Hunter Valley. Victoria's Yallourn power station will close four years earlier than previously planned, in 2028, and AGL, Australia's largest power company, has stated it is hastening the closure of all its NSW and Victorian power stations. Technologically, says Professor Andrew Beer, an expert on structural adjustment at UniSA, the transition away from coal is already well underway. "If you look at my home state of South Australia, renewable energy now forms the core of our energy supply and that is continuing to grow," he says. Yet preparation of the old workforce for a new future hasn't yet begun.
Beer says that with careful management, the Hunter region could be an economic powerhouse, post coal-mining, and that the skills of many of its workers should be in high demand. But, he says, unless we move now these regions will face a grim future. "Places like Muswellbrook and Singleton will be at great risk unless a comprehensive program of structural adjustment is put in place now.
The community needs to have a decent say on where that money goes." Funding these types of programs is not new, he says - between 2000 and 2012 the federal government spent about $88 billion on structural adjustment programs for ailing industries as diverse as car manufacturing, fishing, steel-making and dairy farming.
Warrick Jordan has been working on these structural change issues in the Hunter for the past five years - first with the Department of Employment, and for the past year or so with the Hunter Jobs Alliance, a union-led organisation that is working with government and industry. Jordan says that in the past 12 months he's seen a shift in attitude among workers and in the community, recognising they need to plan for the future. "That's a start," he says. "There are huge structural problems and it takes time to get the right responses in place, to learn how to tackle what are really difficult issues. Sure, it's unpredictable, but we know the trajectory - and unless we have the right programs in place, the right infrastructure and the right authority, we are always going to get caught short."
Jordan says the Federal Government has been almost entirely absent in this debate. "You can't address a problem you refuse to recognise," he says. When asked about transition planning, the federal Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction, Angus Taylor, responded in an email: "The last thing the people of the Hunter need is more highly paid bureaucrats in Sydney and Canberra planning their lives for them. They need a government that can manage the economy, create jobs and keep electricity prices low.
That is what we are doing."
His state counterpart, the NSW Treasurer and Energy Minister Matt Kean, is scathing of Taylor's attitude. The Federal Government, he says, has an ideological obsession with coal and so to even admit that great structural change is underway would be to "admit that their policies have failed ...
if you are saying there's a big bright future for coal, it's inconsistent to have a transition package for it".
Kean says the consumers of our coal abroad have already "started to shift" to greener and cheaper alternatives. "These jobs are going, not because of domestic decisions but because of international forces," he says. "Rather than denying this reality, we need to be managing that risk and supporting those communities." With Eraring's closure his government announced it will spend $550 million in assistance packages. But still, his government continues to approve mine expansions.
Labor can hardly take the high ground - a senior federal Labor figure tells me that MPs have been banned from using the word "transition" because the Coalition weaponised the word before the last election. "We can't even talk about it because the politics are so dire," this ALP figure says. "It's appalling. The community knows what is happening and they just want a plan for where decent paying jobs are going to be."
Greg Piper, the independent member in the state seat of Lake Macquarie, is fully across these issues - his son works at Eraring. Piper increased his majority at the last election, calling for a just transition for coal and energy workers. He says it has been incredibly frustrating "to even get certain politicians and parts of the industry" to acknowledge the need to move. "Just look at the market," he says. "We need to get ready for what is coming. To not get ready is to deny these communities a reasonable future ... it is not just my area; what about Singleton and Muswellbrook and all these other coal communities around Australia? They deserve better."
The war in Ukraine may open up some new markets for Australian thermal coal, buying the industry some time amid soaring prices. But the rush to roll out renewables, particularly in Europe, has become a stampede as the continent weans itself off Russian oil and gas. Dr Kerry Schott, the straight-talking former head of the Energy Security Board, doesn't believe the fallout from Russia's invasion of Ukraine will have any dramatic longterm effect in halting the demise of our thermal coal industry. "Over time, as countries make their emissions targets, the demand for our [thermal] coal will eventually cease," she says. About 55 per cent of Australia's coal exports is thermal coal the stuff burned to produce electricity; the rest is coking coal, used as a fuel and an ingredient in steel-making. "You see it already with fewer mines being built and less approvals for new mines ...
that will not stop, and, if anything [the decline] could speed up," Schott says, especially with the breakneck pace at which solar and wind generation is being built around the world. "It's not going to happen overnight," she adds, "but this transition to renewables is happening very, very quickly, much more quickly than many expected."
The power generation sector will feel it first, and, in the not-too-distant future, the thermal coal miners too will feel the pinch. The technically easy phase of this energy transition will occur over the next decade, Schott says, as we decarbonise much of the [domestic power] grid and electrify cars and public transport. The much more difficult phase will be building a system, possibly through the use of new technologies such as hydrogen, that will have the grunt to power heavy industries like the Tomago Aluminium Smelter at Newcastle, which operates 24 hours a day and consumes about 10 per cent of the state's power.
Schott is confident that the transition, when it comes, will be relatively smooth. But the transition for coal-reliant communities "isn't even on the agenda for consideration".
In the power generation sector - at least with Eraring - there seems to be a reasonably orderly retreat. Staff will get good redundancy payments, plus access to training and education; management have been clear and open about their intentions. Many of the workers have trades and qualifications that are easily transferable and sought after by other industries. Coal miners face a much more uncertain future.
Lithgow boy Craig Gillard has been handed the tiller to steer coal producer Centennial Coal through what will be some rough seas. Gillard started his working life in the accounts department at Lithgow's Angus Place Colliery in 1980 and moved his way through the company, in its various guises, to become the boss. Some 60 per cent of the coal it mines goes to NSW power plants and that coal is responsible for producing 40 per cent of the state's energy. "Centennial keeps the lights on in NSW," he says. Origin Energy, which operates Eraring, is its main customer. Centennial has five mines, all in NSW. Two of those mines, Myuna and Mandalong, were developed in the 1980s specifically to supply coal to Eraring.
There are 250 employees at Myuna and 460 at Mandalong. "With the regional office up there we've got around 1000 workers up in the northern region," says Gillard. "Last year our wages bill in the region was $145 million and we spent $400 million with local suppliers."
So, what to do about the two mines that feed Eraring? There are still about 20 million tonnes of coal left at Myuna - another 13 years' worth at the current rate of extraction - and 60 million tonnes at Mandalong. This mine, Gillard says, already exports about 40 per cent of its coal, so there is existing infrastructure in place to get that coal to port. Myuna is trickier. The coal it produces is not high quality. To make coal that is of export quality, Centennial would need to transport it from the mine at Myuna and mix it with coal from Mandalong - a costly and cumbersome exercise. In 2020 it put in a proposal to truck the coal across and blend it, but this plan was rejected after the community objected to the 64,000 truckloads of coal that would be on local roads each year.
Gillard tells me they are working through a number of options to keep Myuna open when Eraring closes. He recently told the union representatives at Myuna and Mandalong that in light of Eraring "potentially" closing in 2025 the company was looking at various options to pivot both mines to become exporters. But a lot of things have to fall into place. The prices have to stay high, for one. Coal will have to be moved from Myuna to Mandalong, possibly by conveyor belt across land owned by Origin Energy - right where Origin has plans to build a massive battery when the power plant is closed. "We'll work closely with Origin and the government with some infrastructure that we need," Gillard says. Centennial currently doesn't have an agreement with Origin to carry out these plans.
All these things have to line up, and then it has to be financed. And on that front, Centennial has not had a lot of luck of late. "Just lately we had to try and refinance the company and it was extremely difficult," Gillard admits. "The Australian banks want nothing to do with coal ... not one Australian bank would help us with our refinance." The company needed half a billion dollars to keep going and it was only saved when its Thai parent company, Banpu, chipped in some cash and helped organise some finance from Bangkok Bank. "If it wasn't for that relationship [between Banpu and Bangkok Bank]," says Gillard, "we would have struggled to refinance our company."
Centennial promises to put me in contact with some miners from Myuna so I can talk with them about how they see their future. Despite numerous follow-ups I have no success. Through other contacts I manage to speak to a miner who has been at Myuna for many years. (He initially agrees to talk on the record but later calls back and asks not to be identified.) He says Centennial told its workers it intended to remove all the remaining 20 million tonnes of coal reserves from Myuna currently it is mining around 1.5 million tonnes a year. But this old miner is dubious. He's been in the industry for decades and while the price is now at a record high, he knows it could so easily plummet. What have the government and the company done to plan for things if there is a downturn? "Nothing," he says. "We would like to know what Plan B is. I'm fine, I'm near the end of my career, but we employ a lot of young people what's going to happen to those guys?"
Four years ago, before the last election and before the word transition became "weaponised", powerful mining union the CFMMEU funded a transition study called The Ruhr or Appalachia?
The study, by the UNSW Business School, looked at where transition had been done well around the world. In the foreword, the union's national president, Tony Maher, said Australia could either follow the "heart-breaking story of intergenerational poverty and social dysfunction" of the Appalachian region in the US. Or it could take its lead from Germany's Ruhr region, where "forward planning, investing in industry diversification, the staggering of mine closures and a comprehensive package of just transition measures" was reshaping the region and the economy.
"The good news is we have the lead time to make smart decisions about what change looks like," Maher said. "Or at least, we now have a lead time after being caught unprepared by earlier closures, including Hazelwood in 2017." Victoria's Hazelwood was hastily shut down with just a few months' notice. Several years later, another power station, Eraring, has announced it will close early. And the mining industry and the government have yet again been caught "unprepared". As it stands, Australia's coal regions seem destined to take the Appalachian Way.
CREDIT: By Greg Bearup
Word count: 3724
