AUSTRALIA’S aim to slash carbon emissions by 43 per cent by 2030 and hit net zero by 2050 has been ­enshrined in law.
After days of debate and negotiations with the Senate crossbench, Labor successfully passed the landmark Bill through both houses on Thursday.
Environmental groups, industry and business have applauded the move, which was one of the Albanese government’s election promises.
Climate Change Minister Chris Bowen said the legislation put Australia on a “credible path” to net zero.
“The passage of the climate change legislation sends a message to the world that Australia is serious about driving down emissions and serious about reaping the economic opportunities from affordable renewable energy,” he said.
“Legislating these targets gives certainty to investors and participants in the energy ­market and will help stabilise our energy system.” The Senate passed the Bill by 37 votes to 30, following support from the Greens, ­Tasmanian senators Jacqui Lambie and Tammy Tyrrell, and independent ACT senator and former Wallabies star David Pocock.
Senator Pocock’s support came after the government agreed to adopt an amendment, which would involve the annual climate change statement including climate risk assessments, in a bid to increase transparency and accountability.
It was then passed in the House of Representatives, 86 votes to 50. Australian Industry Group chief executive Innes Willox said the legislation was a good foundation for business, government and the community to work towards Australia’s emissions goals.
Mr Willox said cutting emissions by 43 per cent below 2005 levels would require transformational investments in industry, power, transport and more.
“Making those investments requires business confidence that the basic framework of public policy will be strong and stable,” he said.
“These Bills will help provide that basis for investment.” Australian Conservation Foundation spokesman Gavan McFadzean said it was heartening to see Australia’s legislators finally taking the climate crisis seriously.
“For too long Australia has been a laggard and a laughing stock,” he said. “This is no longer the case.” However, Opposition Deputy Leader Sussan Ley slammed the 43 per cent target as a “vanity project”. “It’s a number … nothing on the ground that reduces our emissions, or global emissions, has changed one iota,” she said.
CREDIT: JADE GAILBERGER
Word count: 367
