A NEW property report lists four South Australian regions among the nation’s 10 best affordable areas to buy into.
Hotspotting director Terry Ryder has identified affordable regions nationally that are set to have a bright future based on amenities, infrastructure upgrades, future spending and employment opportunities.
In his city report, Mr Ryder highlighted both Salisbury and Playford. Salisbury was noted for its defence projects worth more than $4bn, an $885m transport corridor, the $1.9bn Edinburgh Parks, the $250m GMH redevelopment and the Gawler train line electrification.
Playford was listed as the fastest-growing LGA in SA, having multiple major job nodes, affordable housing and high yields as well as being the logistic and distribution capital.
“The property market in Adelaide’s northern City of Playford is experiencing rising momentum, fuelled by a revitalised economy and affordability that appeals to first-homebuyers and investors on a budget,” Mr Ryder said in the report.
“The City of Salisbury has defied the negative impacts of Covid-19 through a construction boom made up of medium-scale projects generat­ing thousands of jobs.” Hickinbotham Group design director Ruth Vagnarelli, said the areas offered great value for money.
“The City of Playford and City of Salisbury offer access to facilities including super- schools, large shopping centres, and sporting clubs, with the CBD only a 30-minute drive away.” Support worker Sadiatu Kamara, 35, has recently built in Eyre through Hickinbotham and said she loved living in the City of Playford.
“I loved the environment, the nearby shops, and there are a lot of parks which was great because we were looking to start a family,” she said.
Murray Bridge and Port Augusta also were identified as hot spots. Murray Bridge’s benefits were listed as affordable housing and low vacancy rates, and a diverse economy. Port Augusta was recognised for its renewable energy projects, a $975m copper and gold project, and its role in a $4bn economic corridor.
CREDIT: TOM BOWDEN
Word count: 318
