A TRAM extension from the CBD to Norwood, a small bar precinct and more apartments would make The Parade one of the country’s premier “high-street” destinations, a prominent developer says.
Pep Rocca, who has spearheaded more than $300m worth of development in the area in recent years, has outlined his vision for The Parade after securing planning approval to build a $95m eight-storey apartment building, to be known as ORTA, opposite the Norwood Hotel.
Mr Rocca said more projects like his $110m COMO apartment, retail and office development, currently under construction at the Norwood Mall site, would help elevate The Parade to one of the country’s “must-visit destinations, rivalling the most vibrant neighbourhoods in the eastern states and around the world.
“I’ve worked in Norwood for 30 years, my whole life is on The Parade,” he said. “I want to see Norwood become a major high street destination comparable to the likes of Paddington in Sydney and South Yarra in Melbourne.
“People want to reside where there’s cosmopolitan living. They want excitement,” he added.
The centrepiece of his vision is a tram line extension from the CBD to Norwood. Steven Marshall’s victory at the 2018 election killed off Labor’s tram plans at the time, which included a $279m extension of the line from North Tce along The Parade through to Norwood.
Mr Marshall argued that it had little support from local residents. But Mr Rocca wants the tram extension back on the agenda, arguing it would stimulate further development and make Norwood an even more sought-after place to work, live and play.
“Trams are used in all the best metropolitan places in the world to connect people with the central business district,” he said.
“This is the way of the future in any progressive city,” he said. A tram line extension would also stimulate further development at the eastern end of The Parade, he said.
However, a state government spokeswoman said priorities had changed since the 2018 election, and the new government had no plans for tram extensions. “The government’s priorities are to fix the health crisis and grow the state’s economy by investing in skills, early education, advanced manufacturing and projects that build on our leadership in renewable energy such as the hydrogen jobs plan,” she said on Friday.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 383
