brain health If your daily routine is as tepid as the water from your tap, it’s time to dip your toes – nay, your whole body – into a cold bath or shower. Professor Selena Bartlett explains how extreme temperatures can shake up our senses while calming us down, making it worth our while to plunge out of our comfort zones Can you remember the last time you put yourself in a completely new situation? Imagine you’re taking a warm shower. Just as you’re coming to the end, instead of shutting it off, you turn the handle to the other extreme and feel a sudden jet of cold water hit the back of your neck. Does the thought of that make you shiver?
“No way I’m doing that,” I hear you say. But the benefits of this are exactly what Wim Hof, the Dutch motivational speaker known as the Iceman, discovered after he first jumped into an icy lake when he was 17. Over a period of time, Hof was able to train his brain to enable his body to handle extreme temperatures. He picked up many endurance-related Guinness World Records, including the longest direct contact with ice – achieved when he sat in an ice bath for one hour, 52 minutes and 42 seconds. Dr Vaibhav Diwadkar, professor of psychiatry and behavioural neuroscience, and his Wayne State University colleague Dr Otto Muzik, professor of paediatrics and radiology, were the first researchers to study how Hof’s brain responded when he was exposed to extreme cold. You can listen to our interview with Diwadkar on episode 90 of my Thriving Minds podcast. The study, he says, showed Hof’s brain and body could withstand extreme changes in body temperature thanks to his ability to activate the pain relief centres in the brain, thought to be outside of our conscious control.
Hof has spoken about how exposure to the cold helped him overcome a deep depression when his wife, the love of his life, died by suicide in 1995. At the time, Hof was bereft with four children to raise. He wasn’t coping, and profoundly lost to grief. He then started to heal himself through a system of breathing exercises, cold exposure and conscious control of his body after he noticed that cold water stopped his brain immediately from feeling deep sadness. He felt alive for the first time in years and the icy waters became his friend.
The Iceman had accidentally stumbled across the remarkable and untapped power of the brain, capable of being fine-tuned with simple methods that involved daily exercises, such as cold exposure. This took him outside of his comfort zone. He discovered a way to draw a line under his past traumas and grief, and set about rewriting his future brain and life. The Wim Hof Method, like other examples of neuroplasticity, shows how the brain can be trained like a muscle and that the brain is like a machine. There are thousands of people around the world who have since used Hof’s simple brain-training techniques.
When we repeat the same activities for years, the brain no longer has to think about what to do next – it’s on automatic pilot. This is great when we have mundane tasks to achieve every day. But doing something new every day is a great way to train the brain to feel comfortable with discomfort, and you don’t need to jump into an icy lake or take extreme measures.
To get started, try turning the shower handle to cold water at the end of a warm shower. Start small for 10 seconds; you can even aim your shower nozzle on your toes or legs first. Work your way up to the back of your neck and notice how it makes you feel. You may find a cold shower is hot. After all, there is always a first time for everything.
Professor Selena Bartlett is a neuroscientist, author and the host of the Thriving Minds podcast on brain health.
READY TO TRAIN YOUR BRAIN? Get your neural pathways fired up with some brain-bending puzzles at Brain Gains, available on the App Store.
CREDIT: Professor Selena Bartlett
Word count: 694
