POWER prices for more than 60,000 South Australian households and businesses will skyrocket under a decision by the Australian Energy Regulator.
The AER on Thursday released its so-called default market offer price, which outlines the maximum electricity retailers can charge residential customers and small businesses who have not shopped around for a better deal.
SA residential customers face average bill hikes of $124 a year, or 7.2 per cent, while small businesses will pay $459 more, up 5.7 per cent.
The move, blamed on rising wholesale electricity costs, affects 550,00 homes and 93,000 small businesses across SA, NSW and Queensland.
The regulator said the higher default price followed worldwide disruptions from the war in Ukraine and the associated supply chain disruptions that have sent coal and gas prices surging. It also said extreme weather in NSW and Queensland had affected coal supplies and electricity demand, while “multiple generators” had been affected by unplanned outages.
Regulator chairwoman Clare Savage said: “In setting these new (default) prices, we understand the significant impact they will have on some consumers who may already be struggling with cost-of-living pressures.
“We are required to set a price that will allow retailers to recover their costs, earn a reasonable margin and support retailers to compete and offer better deals and products in a competitive retail environment.
“If a large number of retailers are unable to recover their costs and are forced to exit the market – as we have seen recently in the United Kingdom – that will add more cost to consumers.” The regulator did say customers who shopped around would continue to save on their bills. Based on deals available from retailers this month, residential customers switching from the default to a median market offer could save hundreds of dollars, while businesses could save $1000 or more.
The state opposition’s energy spokesman Stephen Patterson called on the state government to explain how it would reduce cost-of-living pressures.
“We knew this was coming and other jurisdictions, like Queensland, planned ahead and have already announced a $175 cost-of-living rebate for power bills,” he said.
Energy Minister Tom Koutsantonis said Labor was focused on “driving down prices long-term by investing in renewable resource production like wind, hydrogen and solar”. “SA has already made big steps towards the transition towards renewable energy,” he said.
CREDIT: ALEX DRUCE
Word count: 388
