ENVIRONMENT Australians can now rewrite their environmental future and help climate change with the tap of a button.
Optus’ latest Living Network feature, Optus Eco, allows customers to reduce and offset their environmental impact by making changes to how they connect, manage their service and upgrade devices.
Customers can also go greener for 60c each month to offset some of their mobile’s environmental impact and support Australian carbon reduction projects.
“We are proud to partner with GreenCollar, an environmental project developer, and we’ll continue to offer our customers even more options to help reduce their environmental impact in the near future,” says Matt Williams, Optus’ managing director of marketing and revenue.
“By the end of 2025, 100 per cent of Optus’ electricity requirements will be backed by renewable energy sources, and we will reduce and recycle over 90 per cent of our electronic waste.” HOW ECO WORKS The Optus Eco feature, via the My Optus app, is easy to use. Choose as many of the available options as you like to reduce, off-set and amplify, such as: ● Customers can go paperless and receive their Optus bills and invoices online to reduce their paper waste and carbon emissions.
● Connect to a plastic-free digital SIM. For every 100 eSIMs connected, 1kg of plastic waste is saved from going into landfill.
● Recycle, reuse or donate an old device. This can reduce tech-waste through trading in or recycling a handset, or maybe help someone in need through Optus’ Donate Your Device program.
OTHER WAYS TO HELP Optus customers can take extra steps to make a positive eco-impact. They can recycle any used Optus-branded modems through their local retail Optus store, where 95 per cent of materials are recovered and reused.
Customers can recycle old mobile phones or SIM cards at any Optus retail store. When customers donate their spare handsets, Optus will pair it with a Donate Your Data SIM so its new owner can get connected.
CREDIT: PATRICK TADROS
Word count: 329
