With South Australians learning last month of expected energy price hikes of up to 130 per cent, there has never been a better time to harness the power of the sun.
Sparked by the skyrocketing costs of coal and gas, the latest price rises will add further hip pocket pain to homeowners – meaning they will need to consider all options to save money.
And one proven way to do so is by switching on to solar energy with the assistance of the family-owned and operated Solar Power Direct team.
The Welland-based company – which employs its own Clean Energy Council accredited electricians – has installed more than 5000 solar systems throughout the state since 2011, with knowledgeable staff on hand to provide advice to help with all aspects of solar decision-making.
Solar Power Direct managing director Paul Maiolo says that for those people who already have a solar system, now is the ideal time to consider adding battery storage – ensuring “self-sufficient energy all day and night”, even during the darker winter months.
“Battery storage systems can also provide back up protection when grid fails,” Mr Maiolo says.
“But not all battery systems are made equal, so customers should be sure to select a battery that offers exactly what they need.
“Larger solar system installations will also future-proof your home for electrical appliances – including electric vehicles.” Solar Power Direct can offer both solar and battery solutions for any home or commercial property – including existing homes and/or new-build constructions.
Mr Maiolo says with limited SA Government Battery subsidies of up to $2000 still available – along with other solar system incentives – it was a good time to consider installing a Tesla Powerwall Battery System. Powerwall benefits include: ● Controlling and reducing reliance on the grid by powering your home and electric vehicle with renewable energy.
● With solar, you typically generate more clean energy than you need. By combining with the Powerwall, a rechargeable home battery, you can store excess energy from your solar panels for use anytime – even during a power outage.
● Being able to monitor the energy you produce, and control the system with 24/7 access via the Tesla app.
● A completely automated system designed for any home, it offers easy installation and no maintenance.
● The technology to detect a power cut, disconnect from the grid and automatically restore power to your home within a fraction of a second.
● A 5kW continuous power output means your home or business keeps running with little disruption. Contact Solar Power Direct for an obligation-free quote – experienced staff will tailor a quote to each homeowner/commercial needs. For details call 7226 0560 or log on to solarpowerdirect.com.au
Word count: 453
