THE promise of cheaper power prices was quite clear. Prime Minister Anthony Albanese went to the May 21 federal election promising a $275 annual cut.
Specifically, Labor’s Powering Australia plan, Mr Albanese said, would focus on the greater use of renewable energy and would cut the average household’s power bill by $275 a year by 2025.
Rather than heading down, though, the forecast for power prices is a huge rise next year. This would come on top of years of ­surging electricity bills.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission on Tuesday revealed households’ power bills had already soared by an average $300 over the past six months.
Alinta chief executive Jeff Dimery, who heads the nation’s fourth-largest electricity retailer, declared power prices would go up by a minimum 35 per cent in 2023 amid a choppy energy transition and the closure of coal plants.
A 35 per cent or more rise next year doesn’t leave much time for Mr Albanese’s promised $275 annual bill cut by the end of 2024 – barring a sudden miracle.
We cannot, though, afford to rely on good intentions to boost electricity affordability and supply reliability. Households and businesses are hurting now. The pain is not as severe as in the UK or Germany, where supply is tight. But the forecasts are grim.
Electricity has been at the forefront of the so-called ­climate war, waged in Australian politics for most of the past two decades.
Labor wanted to end that turmoil and secured a mandate to do so by winning May’s election with majority government. The rise of the so-called “teal independents”, who ousted Liberals from blue-ribbon seats in NSW and Victoria, was fuelled by demands for ­action on climate change.
This will be an extreme policy test for the Albanese government. The challenge is to provide electricity supply security and affordability, while embracing a clean energy future with coal supplies closing early. It’s a tough ask, but that’s what they signed up to do. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Gemma Jones, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA, 5000
Word count: 348
