AUSTRALIAN billionaire Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest has unveiled a radical $9.2bn plan to quit fossil fuels and decarbonise his mining empire by the end of the decade.
In what the mining magnate said was the “most significant announcement” he has made since starting Fortescue, the world’s fourth-largest iron producer will be completely green by 2030.
Fortescue informed the market of its renewable-powered revolution on Tuesday. Mr Forrest briefed industry and world leaders in New York at the start of Climate Week, which runs alongside the high-powered United Nations General Assembly.
Speaking to News Corp, Mr Forrest said he wanted the mining industry to transition from the laggard to the world leader on reducing carbon emissions. Fortescue’s massive investment would be offset by savings from the company permanently tearing up its fossil fuel bills, he said.
“We waste between $US2.7bn and $US3bn per year, smoked up in the air,” Mr Forrest said. “Now we can invest $US6.2bn and we have hard assets on the ground, which can see us producing our own energy forever. It’s really not a hard calculation.
“This is now a light on the hill for every manufacturing or heavy industry company in the world to realise you can go green,” he said.
Fortescue has spent about $1bn over the past seven years to identify the necessary technology to end its reliance on fossil fuels. The company’s new investment includes up to three gigawatts of renewable energy and battery storage, as well as the rollout of a green mining fleet and the world-first electric Infinity Train developed with Williams, the company behind the Formula One team.
It will enable the company to stop using 700 million litres of diesel per year by 2030 and means Fortescue will avoid three million tonnes of carbon emissions annually – the equivalent of taking almost 650,000 cars off the road.
“This should have been done ages ago. You scratch your head and wonder why, when you see the simplicity that Fortescue’s applied to all its elimination of fossil fuel,” Mr Forrest said. He had offered a personal “how-to” guide on Fortescue’s decarbonisation to his industry rivals to encourage them to follow suit and end the “climate change wars”.
Mr Forrest said the move would improve Fortescue’s operating costs by 50 cents per share and deliver net operating savings of $US818m per year from 2030. Fortescue Future Industries chief Mark Hutchinson said no carbon offsets would be required for it to decarbonise, promising they would achieve “real zero”.
CREDIT: TOM MINEAR US CORRESPONDENT
Word count: 419
