QUAFF Des Houghton deshoughton1@gmail.com
WHAT’S not to like about the new range of Rewild wines? According to winemaker Jade Woods, they pass a stringent sustainability checklist – and they sell for $9.99 a bottle.
I am not going to pretend that any of them will challenge for the Jimmy Watson Trophy but they are honest wines for the price.
The name Rewild is short for rewilding which, she says, is environmental speak for “Giving more back to mother Earth that we take”.
The vegan-friendly collection so far includes six whites, a rosé and four reds. They are the result of a three-year project by the Duxton Vineyards group to “minimise the impact of the winemaking process on the environment”, Woods says.
The mother of three says she believes Duxton is now Australia’s largest sustainable winery.
Its headquarters are at Buronga on the River Murray, in NSW, just across from Mildura, in Victoria.
The firm’s mantra printed on the label reads: “Wine doesn’t have to cost the earth.” Cute.
Duxton has reduced its carbon footprint with renewable energy and a recycling program.
The labels are made from sugarcane and the bottles are lightweight and packed in recycled cardboard.
Woods and senior winemaker Tony Allen say Rewild’s “regenerative agriculture” scheme has boosted soil health.
“We start by adding microbes to the vineyard’s soil to increase nutrition efficiency,’’ says Allen.
More than 8000 tonnes of compost were made each year from skins and stalks after the grapes were pressed.
“We recycle everything we can, from the majority of vineyard trellising to up to 150 million litres of water every single year.” Duxton is proud the endangered regent parrot has made its home on a 70ha site where 20 different trees and shrubs have been planted.
These are wines made to appeal to eco-conscious quaffers.
And at his first tasting, master of wine Andrew Caillard said: “Within the under $10 category, the Rewild range offers consumers great value, easy drinking wines.
“The Rewild Pinot Grigio is well concentrated with good varietal definition, fresh mineral notes and a touch of sweetness, while the Rewild Chardonnay is fresh and fruit-driven, with plentiful apricot and nectarine flavours.” The range is available at Dan Murphy’s and also includes a moscato, sauvignon blanc and rosé, cabernet sauvignon, shiraz and merlot. At a preview tasting, I was impressed with a fiano and a prosecco. They will be released next month.
CREDIT: Des Houghton
Word count: 403
