AUSTRALIA has about $185bn worth of hydrogen projects in the pipeline, ex-chief scientist Alan Finkel says, telling the Australian Hydrogen Conference it was “in the box-seat’’ to be a world leader in the sector.
Dr Finkel, a special adviser to the federal government on low emissions technology, said it could be argued that humanity was entering the “electric age” and envisioned a future eventually involving “huge production facilities” making hydrogen for industrial customers. He said the transition would be years in the making, requiring pilot plants to prove up the new technology and then roll them out at scale.
“If hydrogen replaces coking coal as the chemical reductant to produce elemental iron, as a precursor to steel, it will take years to develop the pilot plants and many more years to replace or upgrade the thousands of blast furnaces in operation around the world,’’ Dr Finkel said.
“If ammonia made from hydrogen replaces bunker fuel, to power the 90,000 large ships in the international merchant marine, it will take years to refine the technology at scale, years to develop the bunkering and refuelling infrastructure, then more years to replace the ships that ordinarily have a 30-year operational life.
“And if in some countries’ ammonia made from hydrogen replaces coal in existing coal-fired electricity generators, it will also take us years to prove it works at a 20 per cent penetration level and more years to prove that it works at 100 per cent.’’ “All of it is hard, and we have a long way to go’’, Dr Finkel said. But he said that Australia had made great strides since he was first tasked with mapping out the national hydrogen strategy, which he presented to the government in late-2019.
Dr Finkel said hydrogen currently suffered from an imbalance in supply and demand. While in many ways, it was a superior fuel to coal, oil and natural gas.
An easy win on the emissions front would be to replace the 90 million tonnes of “grey” hydrogen – which is made by stripping the carbon out of natural gas – produced each year to supply industrial processes, he said.
“Doing so would reduce global greenhouse gas emissions by about 2 per cent,’’ Dr Finkel said. “So that would be a big, quick win. The path forward for the industry in the next few years would be for integrated operations, such as co-locating ­renewable energy with industrial operations to produce hydrogen. “They could be planning an integrated solar, wind and hydrogen project in their steel plant or in their fertiliser plant and they are not necessarily starting with a commitment to a finished ­solution,’’ Dr Finkel said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 446
