I HAD the pleasure of spending a few hours this week with the Marion Uniting Combined Fellowship, where one of the cheery co-ordinators began by reading a Spike Milligan poem.
Smiling is infectious You catch it like the flu When someone smiled at me today I started smiling too… As I sat listening to the verse and a few anecdotes about what members got up to over Easter, it struck me that these retirees in suburban Adelaide were far more uplifting than the two men seeking to inspire my support in the federal election.
I hear Scott Morrison and I think of a shrunk, inward-looking Australia where it’s everyone for themselves and we all have something to fear. In these first two weeks of the campaign, and after 10 years of Coalition rule, I’ve got absolutely no sense of the future Mr Morrison wants for our nation.
But I do sense Mr Morrison wants us to fear our relationship with China under Labor – and even fear that Labor is “on China’s side” – despite recent warnings from ASIO chief Mike Burgess that weaponising national security helps no one.
Mr Morrison wants us to fear a flood of asylum seekers if Labor wins office, too.
It’s more of the same, decades-old divisiveness and vilification that harks back to children overboard, instead of initiating a forward-looking agenda and prosecuting arguments for Australia as a generous country that could take more refugees and immigrants.
Mr Morrison wants us to fear “political correctness”, so he backs in Liberal candidates like Katherine Deves despite her ugly, divisive opinions about a tiny proportion of transgender Australians who want to play women’s sport.
But mostly, Mr Morrison wants us to fear a mishandled economy if Labor wins power.
And wasn’t he handed a free kick in front of goal when the Opposition Leader couldn’t recount basic economic figures?
I listen to Anthony Albanese and I want to be inspired, but geez he doesn’t make it easy.
He goes on about “taking responsibility” and “not blaming others” if he becomes leader. I think it’s a negative.
Politicians say they take “full responsibility”. But they never resign any more. They rarely suffer any consequence at all, unless the public backlash is so sustained there’s no choice but to capitulate. So they’re hollow words.
Mr Albanese is at least offering some points of difference in this drudgery campaign: a $2.5bn aged care injection; an urgent NDIS review to help thousands stuck in funding limbo; a referendum to create an Indigenous voice to parliament; cheaper childcare; and a 43 per cent emissions reduction target for 2030, driven by a desperately-needed switch to renewable energy.
Then I hear Mr Albanese – who tested positive for Covid-19 on Thursday and is now stuck in seven-day quarantine instead of out on the election trail – wasting precious, potentially positive airtime scaremongering about cashless debit cards for pensioners under the Liberals, and Medicare being threatened if Anne Ruston becomes Health Minister.
And I wish Australian politics was better than that, and I wish voters weren’t driven more by fear than a big, uplifting idea.
lainie.anderson@news.com.au Follow Lainie @anderson_lainie
CREDIT: Lainie Anderson
Word count: 527
