Cruise lines are showing the way forward by innovating solutions for reducing emissions
The cruise industry is looking to a greener future with recent news from Cruise Lines International Association that its members have committed to pursuing net-zero carbon cruising by 2050. It’s a commitment that goes well beyond green initiatives of recent years, such as the elimination of single-use plastics.
CLIA ocean-going members, of which most of the cruise lines we all know are part, announced that by 2035, all ships calling at ports where shoreside electricity is available will be equipped to use it. This allows engines to be switched off, effectively eliminating carbon emissions while berthed at port.
“The cruise industry has an extraordinary ability to innovate, and we want to channel our collective expertise and commitment to help find solutions as an active partner in the effort to decarbonise shipping,” CLIA chairman Pierfrancesco Vago said.
Already, environmental sustainability commitments have driven innovation, with the first hybrid-powered cruise ships at sea right now.
Hurtigruten Expeditions was an early adopter in 2019, reducing carbon emissions by 20 per cent. Meanwhile, Ponant’s Le Commandant Charcot runs on LNG and battery power. The line is the first to have achieved Green Marine certification, which recognises those in the maritime industry that commit to measuring and reducing their environmental impact.
And Aurora Expeditions is certified 100 per cent carbon neutral. The cruise line has achieved this milestone in partnership with emission reductions project developer South Pole by a combination of sustainability initiatives including compensating for greenhouse gas emissions by buying carbon credits from a renewable energy project in Taiwan. Aurora will soon be debuting the Sylvia Earle, which makes her first voyage to South Georgia and the Falkland Islands in November. The ship will be christened by its namesake, renowned marine biologist, oceanographer and explorer Dr Sylvia Earle.
“This highly anticipated vessel is intended to be a floating ambassador for the conservation of the planet, with a large focus on marine education and conservation in line with Dr Earle’s own longstanding efforts,” Aurora Expeditions CMO Hayley Peacock-Gower said.
The vessel is outfitted with a Citizen Science Centre, and the ship also pays tribute to six other pioneering female conservationists alongside Dr Earle, who are honoured on each of the ship’s public decks: Jo Ruxton, Dr Asha de Vos, Hanli Prinsloo, Dr Carden Wallace AM, Bernadette Demientieff and Sharon Kwok.
Silversea Cruises has announced the 728-guest Silver Nova, developed as part of the luxury line’s innovative newbuild project known as Project Evolution, is set to launch in 2023. Silver Nova will be the first hybrid, luxury cruise ship free of local emissions at port by using fuel cells and batteries, positioning the cruise line at the forefront of sustainable cruising for years to come.
Silver Nova and all future Nova class ships will include a micro auto gasification system, which reduces on-board waste volume, resulting in lower incineration emissions. Andrea Black is excited about the many opportunities for sustainability at sea, from cruise ships using local produce to less fuel-guzzling ways to sail on water and travel on excursions by land.
CREDIT: Andrea Black
Word count: 522
