THE 1414 Degrees board has survived a bid to roll the chair and two directors by the slimmest of margins, but the trio now find themselves co-directors with Kevin Moriarty, who led the charge to have them ousted.
The board has been engaged in an acrimonious war for control of the company, with chair Tony Sacre saying it would be disastrous and key staff would leave if Dr Moriarty’s bid to take control of the board succeeded.
It is the second tilt for control of the board launched by Dr Moriarty in the past 12 months, with the former executive chair, who was instrumental in listing 1414 Degrees in 2018, leaving the company after a failed attempt last year.
Dr Moriarty was aiming to have Mr Sacre and two other directors ejected from the board, to be replaced by himself and associate Ian Burdon.
All three incumbent directors retained their seats, but the vote against the resolutions to oust them came in at less than 51 per cent in each case.
Mr Burdon’s bid to join the board was rejected by a 50.27 per cent vote against. However, Dr Moriarty now finds himself with a board seat, having garnered 51.28 per cent support for his appointment.
Mr Sacre last week said in a letter to shareholders, lodged with the ASX, that if the board was rolled it would be disastrous and “form an existential threat to the company’’.
In comments made to the extraordinary general meeting before the vote on Thursday, Mr Sacre said he was brought in to rectify problems caused by Dr Moriarty himself.
“I was brought on a little over a year ago because two of the three then-directors felt that the company needed a fresh approach to governance,’’ he says in the statement lodged with the ASX.
“They were right. It absolutely did. These issues were resolved professionally by myself and my two fellow directors at the time who, rather ironically, are now being criticised by the very individual who was the prime cause of the steps needed to introduce better governance in the company.” Dr Moriarty has argued that the company is being mismanaged and that a deal to sell a half-stake in its core Aurora renewable energy project was done “virtually at cost’’ and to the detriment of shareholders’ interests.
Mr Sacre countered at the time that there were various factual errors in Dr Moriarty’s communications with shareholders, and characterised them as “misleading or at worst defamatory”.
In a statement after Thursday’s vote, Mr Sacre said the outcome demonstrated the support of the majority of shareholders and the board would “work to deliver the best possible outcomes for all shareholders, our business partners and staff”. Shares in 1414 rose 5 per cent to 10c on Thursday.
CREDIT: GOVERNANCE CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 466
