FAILING an election day voting glitch that installs Craig Kelly as PM, Australians should be waking up to an Albo or ScoMo-led nation on Sunday and – yes – we’re familiar enough with them now to use their nicknames.
So how will the sharemarket react to the third Labor government elected from the opposition benches since 1972, or another Scott Morrison Houdini-style escape act using only a swizzle stick from a Blue Hawaiian cocktail?
History shows investors move in mysterious ways and that Coalition governments aren’t necessarily better for shares. Often they just don’t care. According to AMP Capital chief economist Shane Oliver, markets have risen by an average of 4.5 per cent three months after 10 of the 14 elections held since 1983. The most market-friendly polls were Bob Hawke’s breakthrough victory of 1983 (up 19.8 per cent), his re-election in 1987 (15.9 per cent) and the Coalition’s 2004 win against the crunching Mark Latham handshake (10 per cent).
Investors applaud when governments that were expected to be kicked out actually survive: the market rose 3.9 per cent after Paul Keating’s “True Believers” election in 1993. In the previous May 2019 election, the market bounced an immediate 1.6 per cent after voters gave odds-on Labor the Short(en) shrift.
The worst investor reactions were the 12 per cent slide after Kevin 07’s 2007 win. The market fell 3.9 per cent after Hawke’s fourth and final victory in 1990 and retreated 2 per cent after the Coalition’s 1996 win that ousted Keating. This time around the specific policy differences are muted, so it comes down to assumptions about managing the budget and steering monetary policy.
One presumption is that the Coalition would spend relatively more on defence than Labor, but that both parties would need to bring out the big guns. That bodes well for minnow Xtek (ASX:XTE), which provides military hardware such as drones and ballistic armour.
Our Khaki portfolio includes the bigger Electro Optic Systems (ASX:EOS), which is in the hi-tech space game but also sells on-the-ground hardware such as unmanned drone vehicles and counter-drone defence systems. Given Labor’s sharper focus on climate change, expect an increase in funding to bodies such as Australian Renewable Energy Agency ARENA – which in turn funds private sector developers.
Deloitte Australia’s clean tech index lists no fewer than 88 “clean tech” stocks, so good luck picking the handout winners. Current ARENA recipients include Hazer (ASX:HZR, hydrogen), and Genex (ASX:GNX, pumped hydro and grid solar).
What about housing?
Morgan Stanley describes both major parties’ schemes – the ability to tap super schemes and government co-equity – as “demand side” measures. This is code for “likely to push up house prices even more”.
Both schemes are actually less generous than they seem, but would do no harm for housing-exposed property trusts such as Stockland (ASX:SGP) or building material suppliers such as CSR (ASX:CSR), AdBri (ASX:ABC) or Brickworks (ASX:BKW).
An obvious problem of the post-election performance numbers is that all things being equal, that’s how the market reacts.
But all things are never equal. Kevin 07’s victory was perfectly timed for the global financial crisis, while the 1987 post-poll surge was rudely truncated by the October share crash. Now we have a bear market and a war to muddy the picture.
This story does not constitute financial product (or voting) advice. You should consider obtaining independent advice before making any financial decision. SUBSCRIBE FOR STOCKHEAD DAILY NEWSLETTERS
CREDIT: TIM BOREHAM CRITERION
Word count: 576
