ENERGY Minister Chris Bowen won’t guarantee Labor can still deliver its election promise of a $275 cut to power prices by 2025, after the electricity crisis drove wholesale prices through the roof.
The power bill cut was a major part of Labor’s Powering Australia policy. A month into government, Mr Bowen, inset, would not guarantee the amount promised would be passed on in the wake of the crisis, saying “figures will move around”.
But he insisted Labor’s policies for more renewable energy would still put “downward pressure” on prices.
“Our policies are even more important in light of what we’re dealing with,” Mr Bowen said at the National Press Club on Wednesday.
“In light of the fact that we have been dealing with this crisis … in light of the fact the default market offer has gone up after the election … all that makes our task harder.
“Renewables are the cheapest form of energy so it is more (important) than ever to get them into the system. And they will achieve downward pressure on power prices.” While short spikes in wholesale power prices are not passed on to consumers, sustained high prices are.
Power prices were already expected to rise 12.5 per cent before this month’s energy crisis, with Grattan Institute’s Tony Wood previously predicting the crisis will create “significant” price hikes this time next year.
Opposition energy spokesman Ted O’Brien said it was clear Mr Bowen did not have a plan to deliver its pledge for lower power prices.
“Labor promised a cut in power bills only last month. Every Australian household and business expects nothing less than full delivery of that promise,” he said.
Mr Bowen also said the Queensland government moving to hike royalties on coal was “entirely appropriate but a matter for them.” “I completely understand the need for states to ensure fair revenue for their residents from resources that are under their ground,” he said.
Mr Bowen revealed prices of electric vehicles would drop by $2000 from July 1, promising this would be one of the first acts of the new Parliament when it sat next month.
While Parliament doesn’t sit until the end of the month, Mr Bowen said laws cutting certain taxes on EVs would be backdated.
The Labor government will attempt in that first sitting fortnight to legislate its target of a 43 per cent emissions reduction by 2030, but will have to negotiate with an emboldened Greens crossbench in the Senate to get it through.
“We’ll enshrine a nationally determined contribution of 43 per cent emissions reduction by 2030 and net zero by 2050,” Mr Bowen said.
A poll of 1001 Australians conducted in June for the Institute of Public Affairs found 61 per cent of respondents wanted to pause its 2050 net zero commitment “until we have enough energy supplies to avoid blackouts.” Just 17 per cent said they disagreed, with a majority of respondents in every state saying they supported the pause.
CREDIT: MATTHEW KILLORAN
Word count: 497
