Get expert advice on concrete stains, earthquakes affecting older homes and energy star ratings Q I have a freshly laid concrete pavement with brown spots all over it. The person I employed to do the work is completely confused as to why this has happened. Although they are going to re-lay it, I would like to know what has caused the problem so it does not happen again.
A It is interesting that you described the colour of the spots as brown, this would indicate rust is present. Concrete pavement will typically have reinforcement mesh placed within it; oxidisation can become visible if the steelwork has been laid too close to the finished surface. Another explanation for your problem could be found in the additives used to form the concrete. Iron filings or iron rock fragments can also cause rusting if they’ve been included into the mix and left exposed on the outer edges. Depending on how bad the spotting is, you may be able to remove the marks by using a 10 per cent solution of hydrochloric acid. This, however, may only provide a temporary solution if the origins of the problem are as previously suggested.
Q Adelaide seems to be having a lot of earthquakes lately, I am concerned my very old brick chimney that is on a slight lean will not stand if we have a significant tremor. What would you suggest I do?
A Most brick chimneys built more than 50 years ago have lasted the test of time, its likely yours will be OK too. Although we can’t predict significant tremors, there are a couple of things you can do to ease your concerns. The National Construction Code provides guidance on allowable dimensions; it states a chimney should finish no more than 300mm above the highest part of the roof within 3.6 metres of that point. If your chimney falls outside of these measurements, you could seek the advice of a structural engineer to give a fully informed opinion about its current condition and make up. You mentioned the structure is very old and not square, it may be a good idea anyway to consult with a professional expert to verify its adequacy.
Q What star rating must a new home have? I have a holiday house in the country which I had built a few years ago and was surprised to find out it only meets a five-star energy efficiency rating, I thought all new homes needed six stars.
A Most new dwellings need to have heating and cooling loads comply with a minimum six-star energy efficiency rating, however there are some exceptions to this rule. If your getaway house is an elevated building (transportable) that has a lightweight flooring system with an overall floor area no greater than 60 square metres, South Australian requirements allow it to be rated at five stars. Further to this, the building can exceed the floor area limits and still have a five-star rating if it is located within a climate zone four, is positioned in a nominated rural council area as stated under the Building Code or placed outside local government boundaries with access to a designated amount of renewable energy. Should you wish to find out whether your house is in a nominated council area and would like to know more about the Code, information can be found on the Australian Building Code’s Board website.
Advice provided by the HIA SA’s assistant director, Chris Wiltshire, hia.com.au Advice is an opinion. Stay up to date with building industry news by joining HIA SA’s Facebook group: facebook.com/groups/HIASA. Readers should consider the services of qualified and insured tradespeople. Email your questions to home@adv.newsltd.com.au
Word count: 614
