Bottom line SO many people are squealing regarding the escalating debt the federal government has accrued but never said a word when they received JobSeeker payments and businesses received JobKeeper payments through the Covid pandemic. Hypocrites.
People on welfare expect more and more help from the federal government. Where do they think all this money is coming from?
We should feel so lucky we live in a free democratic country like Australia and not like other countries ruled by dictatorship.
IAN TONKIN, Strathalbyn Mess we’re in IN so many ways it is obvious Australia is presently in a very big mess. Climate change is rampant, with no end in sight.
Inflation is out of control. Wage levels are not keeping up with inflation. Balancing household budgets is close to being impossible for so many people. Buying a house, in particular for many of our youngsters, is almost out of the question.
Rental properties are like hen’s teeth.
Petrol is the new gold. Our magnificent forests are being cleared at a pace that is hard to believe.
A great number of our native animals are on the verge of extinction. The Great Barrier Reef is in big trouble. Plastic is a major problem in our oceans.
Our health system seems no longer be able to function as we all know it should. We are having an election on Saturday. Could this be our salvation? BRIAN MEASDAY, Myrtle Bank.
Potholes ahead THE government-repealed electric car tax sends a message to manufacturers all new electric cars must have pothole mode as a usable option.
When they actually (and they will) take over as the most sold vehicle in Australia and the world, there will be no funding to maintain the road networks as there is now with fuel excise.
Watch the outcry in a few years when governments realise their folly and they try to charge a tax then.
The public will expect any government of any persuasion to absorb any of these costs.
Can’t really see that happening, can you?
BRYAN CLARKE, Andrews Farm Lower bills IN response to the letter writer whose electricity bill has doubled (The Advertiser, Wednesday), we’ve been very fortunate to sign on with Diamond Energy, who are Australian retailers of 100 per cent renewable energy.
We pay a slight surcharge, but our bills have been lower in recent months, not higher, even with using extra cooling/heating.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood Culturally diverse I BOUGHT a hot roast chicken today from my local supermarket. It was tasty and reasonably priced. As a bonus it also came with a label that was a source of merriment around the dining table.
I am not making this up. The label read as follows, “This product contains 95 per cent Australian ingredients”.
We are still wondering how it’s possible to import 5 per cent of a chicken. PHILIP MATTHEWS, Hallett Cove Not fine THERE was a blitz on distracted driving the other day.
The police did it by positioning officers at red lights and imposing a big fine on any driver who touched their phone while waiting for the lights to turn green.
Perhaps the police or the Minister could tell us how many people have ever been killed or injured by looking at their phone while stationary at a red light.
I’m pretty sure its zero.
This isn’t effective policing. It is lazy policing. The lesson a lot of drivers would take from it is don’t check your phone when its safe to, when you are stopped. Do it where you can be sure the police can’t see you.
GORDON DRENNAN, Burton Correction ON Thursday, The Advertiser reported nurse and AFLW footballer Deni Varnhagen made an unsuccessful offer to settle her vaccine mandate challenge out of court. The settlement was not proposed by Varnhagen or her counsel, and was not accepted by them when offered. The case returns to court next month.
Word count: 650
