Break the cycle YOUR editorial suggests that the violence at Whyalla Secondary College could partly be because of a staff shortage (The Advertiser, Thursday).
Other possible reasons put forward are “a high turnover of staff” and “cultural clashes”.
Schools do not teach or condone violence. It occurs because it reflects what is happening in society.
The way children behave is determined by their parents and, if acceptable to the community, is re-enforced by schools. Look no further than this area.
If improvement is to be made, authorities need to concentrate on the causes of unacceptable behaviour in schools rather than the effects.
BARRY HICKS, Frewville Disincentives THERE is even less hope of addressing the rural doctor crisis when doctors see the school environments into which they maybe taking their families, as demonstrated by the violence at Whyalla Secondary College.
While the culture and identity of many country schools is excellent, with violence non-existent, uncertain staffing and limited curriculum offering in schools outside the metropolitan area are compounding realities that medicos with school-age children must take into consideration.
SUSAN POLMEAR, Brighton Deal with it UNFORTUNATELY in this day and age it is not unexpected that young people and, in this case, students become violent at the drop of a hat.
The severity of the punishment is so weak that simply slapping them on the wrist and telling them not to do it is not enough.
Restorative practices may be suitable in some situations. However, the Whyalla incident demonstrates that a more relevant punishment is warranted.
DOMENICA CAVUOTO, Klemzig Australian made ANTHONY Albanese has said Labor will support wage increases, and then said that he would get back to Australia manufacturing.
Does he forget that the main reason manufacturing left Australia was high wages. His support for wage increases will send more of what is left of our manufacturing overseas, the exact opposite to what he is saying.
K OSBORN, Laura Conditioned IT was good to see our two major political party leaders during their final debate for this federal election, in the main, behave like two civilised human beings.
I suppose we can’t really blame them for their childish behaviour previously because they had been conditioned by their time in parliament.
Over the years, successive speakers in houses of parliament, state and federal, have allowed that shout-down style of debate to flourish and, as we saw, it is not for the better.
GARRY TURNER, Port Pirie Other ways FLINDERS University awarding Josh Cavallo an honorary doctorate has the unfortunate effect of devaluing earned doctorates (The Advertiser”, Thursday). Earned doctorates are awarded to those who have spent five to seven years working their hearts out in carrying out research and scholarship to contribute knowledge to society – and their work has been examined by international experts.
Our nation has a civil honours system to recognise those who have made significant contributions to the community and to society in general.
That is a more appropriate way for those who think that Mr Cavallo’s actions should be acknowledged.
PETER BALAN, St Peters No catastrophe THREE elections ago, the then Liberal member for Sturt, Christopher Pyne, had a similar attack of the vapours to current member James Stevens.
Christopher Pyne romped it in.
So, let’s do a bit of a reality check.
To fight for your life is to beat cancer, domestic violence or to survive a cataclysmic trauma.
A catastrophe is a war in Ukraine, world hunger, climate change, universal poverty, the subjugation of women, and an inordinate number of other devastations affecting the quality of life.
The loss or near loss of an electorate is simply a kick up the backside for an MP to do better.
PETER JONES, Glen Osmond Poll declaration HOW many voters, from the first time to the experienced, know where candidates’ preference votes will be distributed when they mark their voting papers?
I would suggest, very few. It would be interesting to see a data poll conducted. I feel every candidate that stands for election, or re-election, should be made to show, and say, where their preferences are being distributed so it’s clear what party they favour.
This would make it easier for voters to make a decision as to who they vote for and in what order.
IAN TONKIN Strathalbyn Slow learners CONGRATULATIONS, Peter Laffrey, on your courageous, intelligent and truthful letter regarding energy (The Advertiser, Thursday).
You have exposed the ignorance and danger of the noisy, clamouring and ill-informed climate change cultists.
If they were less parochial and brainwashed, they would see the UK and Europe have experienced the error of their reliance on renewable energy and are hurriedly investing in coal and baseload energy.
Labor, the Greens and the teals are slow learners and cannot be trusted to deal with an inevitable energy crisis.
MARY-ANNE HIGGINS Rose Park
Word count: 803
