SUSTAINABILITY ON WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY, AUSTRALIANS ARE BEING URGED TO SUPPORT OUR YOUNG ECO-WARRIORS Young Australians putting the planet’s health first have been dubbed Generation Restoration, but older Aussies are being urged to help these young eco-warriors rebuild our home.
The #GenerationRestoration Youth Challenge was launched a year ago by the World Economic Forum to support “young ecopreneurs” and their mindset around restoring, regenerating, renewing, reusing, regreening and rewilding.
With the theme of World Environment Day on Sunday being Only One Earth, sustainability and climate change advocates are urging older Australians to follow Generation Restoration’s lead to bring about real change.
“This is our home, there’s no Planet B. We have a responsibility to ensure we sustain life here,” says Good for the Hood managing director and sustainability engagement consultant Jo Taranto.
“It’s a pretty remarkable place, planet Earth. I think we often forget how incredibly amazing it is as a system, and we’ve done a pretty amazing job of disrupting that system.
“When we recognise that it’s not separate to us and that we are a part of that ecosystem, and that’s the only one we’ve got, we know we’ve got to do more.” Taranto says Generation Restoration deserves support.
“I think we’re in amazing hands, but I really hope they don’t feel it’s only on their shoulders. I would be devastated to think that they didn’t think I had some amazing allies in their parents and their grandparents. I see huge advocates for climate action and living more sustainably in every generation. So I think they just have to look for those champions and know that they are there and, you know, focus on working with those people and doing it together.” A WWF Australia report analysing 20 years of Australian attitudes towards nature shows 95 per cent of young Australians believe climate change is really happening and they are more likely to say that humans are largely causing it.
The 2018 report found young Australians were trying to recycle and compost, and 58 per cent reduced the amount of gas and electricity they used around the house.
Want to join in on the World Environment Day conversation with Jo Taranto on Cuppa.tv? Tune in today at 8.30am (AEST) or watch the replay on demand. Visit watch.cuppa.tv and get a 14-day free trial.
10 ways you can help Here are 10 ways the United Nations Environment Programme encourages all individuals to help fight the climate crisis: 1 Spread the word Encourage friends, family and co-workers to reduce their carbon pollution. Join a global movement like Count Us In, which says if one billion people take action, we could reduce as much as 20 per cent of global carbon emissions.
2 Keep up the political pressure Lobby local politicians and businesses to support efforts to cut emissions and reduce carbon pollution. #ActNow Speak Up and Count Us In have tips for how to do this.
3 Transform your transport Leave your car at home and walk or cycle whenever possible. If the distances are too great, choose public transport, preferably electric options. If you must drive, offer to carpool with others or buy an electric car.
4 Rein in your power use Switch to a zero-carbon or renewable energy provider. Install roof solar panels. Turn your heating down a degree or two, switch off appliances and lights when not in use and buy efficient products. Insulate your loft or roof.
5 Tweak your diet Eat more plant-based meals – your body and the planet will thank you. 6 Shop local and buy sustainable To reduce your food’s carbon footprint, buy local and seasonal foods. You’ll be helping small businesses and farms in your area and reducing fossil fuel emissions associated with transport and cold chain storage.
7 Don’t waste food According to UNEP’s Food Waste Index Report 2021, people globally waste one billion tonnes of food each year, which accounts for 8-10 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions.
8 Dress (climate) smart The fashion industry accounts for 8-10 per cent of global carbon emissions – more than all international flights and maritime shipping combined – and “fast fashion” has created a throwaway culture that sees clothes end up in landfills. Buy fewer new clothes and wear them longer. Recycle preloved clothes.
9 Plant trees Every year, 12 million hectares of forest are destroyed and this deforestation, together with agriculture and other land use changes, is responsible for 25 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions. Plant a tree to help reverse this.
10 Focus on planet-friendly investments Spur change by choosing financial institutions that don’t invest in carbon-polluting industries.
CREDIT: TONI HETHERINGTON
Word count: 773
