A concussion injury ended the AFL career of SA farm boy Justin Clarke, but against the odds he topped his university degree and is now a Rhodes Scholar The brain is an incredible, mysterious, complex organ that will always fascinate Justin Clarke.
The former Brisbane Lions AFL key defender, whose professional sporting career was snuffed out by a severe concussion in a training session in January 2016, knows just how life-changing a brain injury can be.
At 22 years old, in the prime of his elite sporting career, Clarke suffered a sickening mid-air crack of forehead against knee in a routine marking contest. Coaches, staff and some fans watched, horrified, as he lay face down and unconscious on the ground at Giffin Park, Coorparoo, in Brisbane’s southeast. He has since endured a long and ongoing recovery.
For more than a month after his head knock, Clarke’s elite-athlete-fit body was unable to manage more than a slow, flat walk out of the heat of the day. He found it exhausting to walk up the stairs of his Queenslander home.
He was consumed by months of memory loss – he has no memory at all for weeks before the head knock and not much memory for several months afterwards. He also struggled with low energy, mood swings, slurred speech, headaches, mental fatigue, inability to concentrate and debilitating tiredness. Doctors advised him never to play contact sports again and he officially retired from AFL, after 56 senior games, on March 31, 2016.
Walking away from his dream job was crushing. To some extent, it still is. But Clarke, now 27, has always been determined to remain positive and move ­forward.
He has also committed to doing everything he could to heal his brain, to forge new neural pathways and challenge himself academically.
In June 2016, picking up the goals he set before he was drafted to the Lions, he began studying aeronautical engineering at The University of Queensland.
Starting with just one subject, his brain injury made learning and retaining information difficult and he had to relearn and revise concepts many times. He was often vague, sometimes disorientated and regularly suffered “brain fog”.
His concussion symptoms have gradually improved, however, there have been several setbacks along the way, including his attempts to reintroduce competitive and even social sport back into his life.
And even the slightest head knock will still render him “cactus” (there has been a recent car boot incident as well as a beach volleyball spike to his head).
Even in his fourth and final year of study, he would still struggle with concentration levels that would “fall off the edge of the cliff” in the last hour of big exams. He still needs to plan for the inevitable “brain fog day” that follows an extended period of looking at computer screens.
For the most part, Clarke says he feels back to normal, though, more than five years on, there are still challenges. “There are still memory and recall issues,” Clarke says. “My memory is getting better and I’m able to recall more conversations and names but it is still quite challenging.
“I have to make sure I eat really well and go early to sleep. I need a lot of sleep … nine hours is about the minimum amount I can function on. If I work on the ­computer, I’ve got to be aware of what that does to my brain and make sure I have ­appropriate breaks.
“In a lot of respects I’ve been able to adapt and work my way through it but big days need a bit of planning. I need to be aware of what my body is saying.” Despite these challenges, Clarke has excelled academically.
Consistently a high achiever, he was an engineering intern at Boeing Defence ­Australia and did a summer placement with a government research organisation, Defence Science and Technology (DST) Group in Melbourne. In December, he graduated with a Bachelor of Engineering with first class honours majoring in mechanical and aerospace engineering and a Bachelor of Science majoring in mathematics. He was named valedictorian of his graduating class. And, impressively, UQ’s 2021 Rhodes scholar. This year, he has also begun learning French.
Next month, Clarke will leave Australia with his lawyer girlfriend Jess Evatt-Davey, 28, to begin up to four years of study at England’s Oxford University, where he will undertake his PhD at its Thermofluids Institute modelling “hypersonic pulse tunnels”. He wants to make a meaningful contribution to aerospace research, which “can radically change the way we travel around the world and improve access to space”.
His brain is not, and perhaps never will be, quite the same. But Clarke is still determined to make his mark.
At no more than three or four years of age, Clarke would gaze up from his home under the big sky of South Australia’s southern Flinders Ranges and be filled with wonder at the majestic soaring wedge-tailed eagles.
Clarke grew up on his family’s 1600ha cereal cropping (wheat, barley, canola and peas) and sheep property 300km north of Adelaide, between Booleroo Centre and Melrose, as the youngest of four siblings to parents Ian, a fitter and turner by trade, and Sue, a former teacher.
“I’ve always loved spotting wedgies. It was something I was just fascinated by,” Clarke says. “When I was in the ute with Dad, looking out the window, I’d spot them. Watching a wedgie thermal – when they are riding the rising hot air currents, gliding with their huge wingspan – is spectacular. It’s a sight to behold.
“Then, even more impressively, they spot something, fold their wings in and plummet to the ground. They go from graceful and elegant to being so aggressive and attacking.” In year 11, Clarke applied to be a pilot in the air force but was knocked back because he was too tall (he’s 195cm). He obtained his pilot’s licence at age 16 (though hasn’t returned to flying since his concussion because of some “hesitations” about trusting himself in a potential hit of turbulence and dizziness) and graduated from Booleroo Centre District School with an ATAR of 99.95, the highest possible rank.
He credits his parents with filling him and his siblings – brothers David, 38, a mining engineer, and Greg, 35, a software developer, and sister Sally, 32, a veterinarian – with curiosity about the world and a love of learning.
“We all did well academically and it was very much fostered by Mum and Dad,” Clarke says.
“Driving around with Dad to different properties when I was a kid was a chance to interrogate him with different questions about everything and anything.” Clarke returns to the family farm when he can, most recently at harvest time at Christmas. “It is a beautiful part of the world,” he says. “It’s very grounding to be back there doing a bit of hard labour and being told I’m not responsible enough to drive the heavy machinery yet.
“We have all got roles – my brother drives the header, Dad drives the truck and I do all the farmhand type of jobs, which is a typical younger brother thing.”
After his AFL career ended, desperate to fill a void left by elite sport, Clarke began rowing for UQ. And he was good at it, part of the winning 2017 Queensland State Rowing Championship Men’s 8 in January 2017.
But the next month, competing in the Men’s pair event in humid, 45C temperature at the NSW State Rowing Championships, he suffered heat stroke. The combination of physical exertion and ­extreme heat “completely floored” him, regressing his physical and mental improvement since the concussion, he estimates, by six months.
Again, he was physically reduced to only being able to walk, taking at least three months to be able to run again. His memory, concentration and functioning were all impaired and it was a stark reminder he could not push his body like he used to. With rowing out of the question, he tried beach volleyball, which also didn’t end well. While playing a social match in an ­indoor sports centre in 2019, he had the ball spiked straight at his head and was left “wiped out”.
Clarke was disorientated, wobbly, dizzy, his spatial awareness was “shocking” and he was unable to look at computers for about three weeks.
Then, at Easter last year, Clarke bumped his head closing a car boot and within minutes was “on the floor sleeping” without much memory of what happened.
“These things are a bit of a wake-up call and it vindicates my decision to retire (from AFL). There have been times when I feel normal and I’m back out running around and doing different non-contact sports, and I’ve questioned … maybe I could be playing footy,” he says.
“But it’s those type of moments that would be equivalent to a half decent hit in the shoulder and I’d be no good from it.’’ Clarke loves sport and is good at just about everything he tries (except swimming, “I swim like a crowbar”).
He has also had a go at playing mixed netball, AFL 9s (a social, non-contact version of the game) and his first love, cricket. As a kid, he played cricket with his siblings from “as soon as I could hold a bat” and was good enough to play with Woodville District Cricket Club in Adelaide until he was drafted to the Lions.
During his time interning with DST, he played cricket at Deepdene Uniting Cricket Club and has also played for the Surfers Paradise Cricket Club First XI.
He plans to try out for the Oxford University team in the annual University Match against Cambridge University at the hallowed Lord’s Cricket Ground, London.
“It’s one of those things that you have to balance living your life … there are risks and rewards that everyone makes every day,” Clarke says.
“I’m the type of person who will seek to do different things and push myself in different ways. Sometimes I’m not the smartest with it; being a young person, we often make poor decisions. As I get older, the temptation to run around is getting a bit less and I guess the temptation will be removed as I get older. Sometimes, the body wants to do what the head can’t.” In 2018, Clarke also became involved with AFL again, filling an assistant coach position with the Western Magpies at Sherwood. Being close to AFL has been something of a difficult issue because Clarke would still dearly love to play.
“I still watch the Lions. I wouldn’t say I’m an avid watcher … if I don’t watch the Lions, then I’m aware of the results, more than watching games,” he says.
“When I do watch … it’s one of those things that I would desperately like to be able to still play. I still want to play. I was about to hit my straps. I was still pretty young for a key defender. Even now at 27, there are still very good key defenders floating around the league at that age.
“But with the Magpies, it was really nice to be involved in football, and be happy to be involved with football again, and not be driving home frustrated. I could go there, have a good session and drive home happy, instead of leaving frustrated that I couldn’t be on the field myself doing something that I loved and was good at.
“The fact I could do that meant I had let go a little bit of that dream. So there was a bit of growth there. And that will keep improving as I get older and out of my prime.” Sport-related concussion has emerged as a growing health concern in Australia and internationally.
A traumatic brain injury, concussion occurs from a knock to the head or body and can be difficult to recognise.
Obvious symptoms include unconsciousness, convulsions or difficulty balancing or walking but there are also more subtle signs such as headache, neck pain, nausea, fatigue, irritability, sensitivity to light, sadness and of being “in a fog”.
Australia’s major football codes (AFL, rugby league, rugby union and soccer) have all introduced rule changes for assessment of players suspected of being concussed.
In 2016, and updated in 2019, the Australian Medical Association, the Australian Institute of Sport, Australasian College of Sport and Exercise Physicians, and Sports Medicine Australia launched a landmark Concussion in Sport Position Statement addressing growing public health concerns and amid a growing body of evidence to suggest repeated concussions increase the risk of developing neurodegenerative diseases.
One of the key recommendations was that a more conservative approach to managing concussion be adopted for children and adolescents aged 18 and under, with no sporting activities until 14 days after all symptoms have resolved.
Dr Fatima Nasrallah, a senior research fellow in traumatic brain injury from UQ’s Queensland Brain Institute (QBI), is working to develop a quick and cheap test to accurately measure brain recovery.
She is using advanced MRI to collect data on mild traumatic brain injuries and when it is safe for an athlete to resume sport. Nasrallah is scanning the brains of volunteer athletes in high-contact sports including AFL, rugby and kickboxing.
She is researching changes in biomarkers – molecules in the blood or saliva – when concussion occurs that she can match to the brain scans. She aims to identify biomarkers specific to the brain to determine whether there is a brain injury or when the brain has fully recovered.
“You may feel fine – recovered from headaches or blurred vision – but your brain takes longer to mend and is still recovering behind the scenes,’’ Nasrallah says. “If you get another knock during this time, the effects are cumulative and can lead to long-term consequences. Brain scans are costly and take time. We are using them now to gather data but ultimately we want to develop a quick and cost-effective test that can be used to judge whether someone’s brain has fully recovered.’’ Clarke, who signed up as a QBI ambassador in 2016, says concussion education is working but there is still more work to be done, especially in lower community leagues where losing a player may impact the outcome of the game.
“Rules have changed quite a lot, which is a great thing, which means we are listening to the research, particularly at the elite level,” he says. “For athletes, in that moment, with adrenaline plus inhibited cognitive function, you are not thinking clearly at all and it’s very difficult to make appropriate decisions about whether you are fit to continue playing. This is the classic problem with concussion. “There needs to be the recognition that it is just a game and it’s not life or death. The brain is incredible. It is a phenomenal bit of hardware that we can’t really compare with anything with our modern technology. It’s such a beautiful thing and worth protecting.”
CREDIT: ELISSA LAWRENCE
Word count: 2495
