This is no yoke I WENT into my local supermarket Wednesday and there wasn’t an egg to be seen. What’s happening?
Is there a new egg-agerated shortage? And are we about to see another toilet paper wipe-out?
Dr IAN NAPIER, St Peters Pollie wage rise LETTUCES are costing $12 and there is the threat of $3 petrol for Christmas. But we get a smug-looking Prime Minister Anthony Albanese detailing another about $100-a-week minimum salary increase for our political masters.
The lowest paid have just been awarded $40 a week, but don’t plan on spending it any time soon, with it not flowing to some for quite a considerable time.
This is regardless of the fact it is needed now.
In all this, the reports have been deafening regarding those less fortunate – pensioners, unemployed and the disabled – that struggled to survive before the cost of living exploded.
I believe prices have risen way more than the supposed 5 per cent. It is more like 15 per cent for me.
When can those on government support expect their $5000 a year increase? GRANT BRENNAN, Blakeview Pension pressure PRIME Minister Anthony Albanese is a champion of the poor, asking the Fair Work Commission for a more than 5 per cent increase in the minimum wage.
I guess pensioners can expect their more than 5 per cent rise in their pensions soon as well.
RADLEY KING, Mawson Lakes Power transition I THINK the position Australia finds itself in with power and energy generation is ridiculous.
It seems the race in Australia to get rid of fossil-fuel generation with windmills and solar panels at any cost is like shooting yourself in the foot.
Consider the fact that some other big countries such as India and China are building new coal-fired stations to burn Australian coal, which is our biggest export.
If Australia wants to help reduce worldwide emissions, and is serious about climate change, then stop exports of coal and gas. How badly have we been governed for many years when we have so much gas, yet little is retained nationally for our use?
PAUL FRISBY, Aberfoyle Park Fix the supply OK, have I got this right? Why are there power shortages in most states? My outlook is simple. All forms of government have pleaded with more people to build more houses in confined housing estates.
For example, rip down one house and put three or four in its place. This is all good for the treasury departments, but they do nothing to increase the infrastructure needed to provide services.
So I believe governments are to blame for power outages because they have not increasing infrastructure to cope with the increase in usage.
Do not blame the consumer. It is a problem you governments have created. Take responsibility for your lack of foresight and do something about it.
DEAN COOK, Willaston Vital wage rise HERE we go again.
It didn’t take long for economic cliches to come out. They may be catchy, but may also be flawed.
Such as: “It’s great to get a pay rise. It’s even better to have a job” (“Rise is good but what’s it costing?”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
The Fair Work Commission lifted the minimum wage by 5.2 per cent because of inflation. Inflation came first. It’s not wage increases that cause inflation, in my view.
And I believe it’s not better to have a job if you can’t live with dignity. The days of catchy cliches and serfdom are over.
BOB RUWOLDT, Seacombe Heights Promise or pork?
WHAT is wrong with this state government?
Is it pork barrelling already?
We got rid of the federal government, which didn’t seem to learn anything from the “sports rorts”.
I hear Premier Peter Malinauskas tell us his government is living up to its election promises.
What on earth is happening here? Didn’t anyone tell this government they are supposed to be pork barrelling going into an election, not coming out of one?
What a bunch of amateurs.
DAVID JANNSEN, Adelaide Closing coal I APPLAUD Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan and his government for taking the politically bold step in ­closing its remaining state-owned coal generators by 2030.
Investing in renewable energy, storage and infrastructure is a sensible plan, given the growing cost of maintaining their ageing coal plants and the availability of cheap excess solar generated during the day.
More admirable is the WA government’s plan to support workers and the wider community in Collie in the transition to other industries.
This is what leadership looks like – foresight and future planning. One hopes similar support will be provided for our remaining coalmining communities when it is their turn for transition.
CHING ANG, Magill Stop violence I BELIEVE a clip around the ear for children is never acceptable, even if done rarely. RUTH POTTER, Kadina
Word count: 805
