Hawaii has new ways to make your holiday all the more rewarding Where are Hawaii’s best beaches? Find out at escape.com.au/aloha As we Australians wing our way back to Hawaii, we’re not only able to dive into Hawaii’s greatest travel hits, but also discover some new ways to connect with the islands.
While an increasing number of travellers have become more aware of sustainable and regenerative travel in their stay-at-home times, so too has the Hawaiian travel industry, which is now more interested than ever in attracting mindful travellers to its shores.
In late 2020, the Hawaii Visitors and Convention Bureau launched the Malama Hawaii Program, an invitation to malama, which means to take care of, protect and preserve. There is now a range of Malama activities on each of Hawaii’s six major islands, including helping a non-profit to a restore a 400-year-old native fishpond on Oahu, lending the Lahaina Restoration Foundation a hand as it processes historic artefacts on Maui, and beach clean-ups on Kauai.
THE BIG ISLAND On Hawaii Island, also known as the Big Island, we arrive at Paradise Helicopters at Kona airport ready to take part in their Malama Tour, which combines aerial sightseeing with a native tree planting. We soon discover that low cloud cover has forced pilot Ryan Moeller to come up with an alternative plan and while we won’t be getting our hands dirty this time, our trees will still be planted in our names and we’ll still see the island from the air.
Our flight takes us over frozen lava flows to the lush rainforests, sheer cliff faces, endless waterfalls and black and white sand beaches of the spectacular Kohala Coast, before making our way back over volcanic craters.
When we land for a stroll to the base of a waterfall, Ryan points out that only two of the trees that surround us are native. Both Ryan and the company’s owner, Calvin Dorn, have studied forestry and since 2014, Paradise Helicopters’ carbon offset program has been used to plant native trees that can each sequester up to a tonne of carbon in their life.
Sustainable travellers can find lots of like-minded operators in addition to official Malama program tours around Hawaii. At Kona, on Hawaii Island, we join a Fair Wind snorkelling tour to Kealakekua Bay, a marine sanctuary at the base of a towering lava cliff where a white monument pays tribute to Captain Cook, who was killed near the spot.
After using biodiesel from the island’s recycled vegetable oil for years, in 2020 Fair Wind Cruises also became the first tour company in Hawaii to offer plant-based meals after Alex and Jenn Dant used the Covid pause in tourism to make some changes to their operations. Now a lot of the produce on the cruises comes from their own farm, and waste is composted to feed the soil that will then feed the humans. After snorkelling time and playing on the boat’s waterslide, we tuck into our lunch and discover that barbecued jackfruit really can be confused for pulled pork on a slider – something that has pleasantly surprised so many people that Fair Wind has shared their recipes online (fair-wind.com/recipes).
ON OAHU Over on Oahu’s North Shore, Turtle Bay Resort also made the most of the Covid downtime to conduct major renovations. The entrance, lobby, pool, shops and other common areas are now completely transformed, and while some of the rooms are yet to be renovated, new additions for guests include complimentary water bottles and refill stations on every floor.
The resort is on about 530ha of land that’s protected from other developers, with 265ha dedicated to conservation, and has its own on-property farm where guests can learn about native crops and pick their own ingredients, or simply dine on them in the hotel restaurants and bar.
The entire roof of the main building is covered with solar panels, and there are more to be found on the Ocean Bungalows and at the farm, along with a solar farm on the golf course, which is kept green from the resort’s recycled water thanks to a wastewater treatment system.
In Waikiki, the Alohilani Resort has become the first Hawaiian hotel to make a commitment to achieve carbon neutral certification. Already 100 per cent powered by renewable energy, the resort also plans to cover emissions from supply and logistics chains as well as production waste, and has partnered with the Hawaiian Legacy Reforestation Initiative to plant 100,000 endemic trees.
The program invites guests to enjoy horseback riding or off-road tours at the Gunstock Ranch on Oahu’s North Shore as they plant their own tree, which they can then track throughout its lifetime through a radio-frequency identification chip.
MORE TO KNOW As well as the chance to give back, some Malama tours also offer free nights in luxury hotels. The Malama Hawaii Program (gohawaii.com/malama) has a list of participating properties, including four Outrigger hotels in Waikiki. So far more than 300 people have taken up Outrigger’s offer to get their third night free by joining the eco adventure to Kualoa Ranch, which includes helping to plant kao (taro) with the mountains we’ve seen in Jurassic Park movies, 50 First Dates and so many other films as a backdrop.
Unless you have the time and skills to sail your own boat, for now there’s no completely green way to get to Hawaii, but Hawaiian Airlines has an easy carbon calculator and explains how our offset money will be used to help restore rangeland, protect forests and more.
By switching to external electricity at the gate rather than using jet fuel for lights, airconditioning and other systems, the airline has saved about 620,000 gallons of fuel a year, and while routes are still to be confirmed, Australia could see the airline’s new 787-9 Dreamliners coming our way in the future.
Acknowledging that little things can add up, the airline recently switched to environmental activist and actor Jason Momoa’s water brand, Mananalu, in its premium cabins, with the new recyclable aluminium cans expected to save about 142,000 plastic water bottles from transpacific operations.
Unfortunately, on our economy flights, reusing and reducing was not an option when it came to plastic. Due to Hawaiian Airlines’ Covid-19 precaution policy, cups cannot be reused and every single drink had to be served in a new piece of plastic. On a 10.5-hour flight from Honolulu to Sydney, that is a lot of cups.
While some things still need to change, such as the single-use amenities in the hotels we stayed in, a whole lot of wonderful changes have already happened, and it’s clear that Hawaii is looking to a greener travel future. And the more we support it, the faster it will come.
The writer travelled as a guest of Hawaii Tourism Oceania.
Amanda Woods rarely leaves the house without her reusable Aloha State Hello Kitty shopping bag bought from Hawaii’s famous ABC Stores.
Environmental impact FLIGHTS Hawaiian Airlines Sydney Honolulu return on A330: 1.2 tons carbon dioxide = $22.20 in offsets Honolulu Kona return Boeing on 717-22A: 0.11 tons carbon dioxide = $2.00 in offsets CARS About 250km in petrol vans: 0.05 tons carbon dioxide = $0.62. Divided by seven passengers = $0.09 each.
WALKING About 140,000 steps. SCORE: Medium
CREDIT: Amanda Woods
Word count: 1215
