Warrnambool's Alison Anderson is set to retire from farming at the home of the famous Rossander Angus stud and Dundonald dairies.
Established in 1966 by Mrs Anderson and her late husband Andrew, Rossander Angus became a household name.
Mrs Anderson said it was renowned for its genetic superiority and the cattle won accolades at many of the nation's premier cattle shows.
She said the cattle often achieved grand champion or most successful exhibitor status and had taken out the prestigious Hordern trophy in Sydney and the Lyons trophy in Adelaide on numerous occasions.
She played a large role in both establishing and managing the business over the years.
"I've made the difficult decision to sell the Rossander portfolio of properties and stud as well as Dundonald dairies," she said.
"As my daughter Helena is a lawyer in renewable energy in London, I have decided the time is right to sell the property.
"The enterprise consists of a 300-cow dairy, land zoned for development, stunning historic homesteads and superb grazing land - some with Merri River frontages only two minutes from the city of Warrnambool."
Mrs Anderson said she had enjoyed farming and showing stock over the decades, as well as hosting events such as weddings and conferences on their property.
"I feel it is now time to pass the farming enterprises onto new owners," she said.
"Andrew and I accumulated quality land close to the city and I hope we have made a worthwhile contribution to the development of Warrnambool, which has grown to be a vibrant, easy-living city with outstanding educational, shopping and sporting facilities."
She said the family's gift to the city was Rossander Park, the city's sporting facility on Caramut Road.
"The Rossander portfolio is to be sold by expression of interest," she said.
"I would like to sell the properties as a whole - walk in walk out - with the competent staff staying on."
Mrs Anderson said she would still sell the farm's cattle at market in the short term while the property was on the market.
The property is being sold through CBRE Agriculture, with expressions of interest closing on June 29.
CBRE Agriculture agent Shane McIntyre said rarely did such a diverse portfolio of properties so close to one of Victoria's most livable cities come onto the market like this.
"All of the 10 lots are ideally-located assets that over time will prove to be outstanding investments adjacent to one of Victoria's most popular coastal communities," Mr McIntyre said.
CREDIT: Monique Patterson
Word count: 419
