A bright new future is being mapped out for three planned clean-energy projects in the Upper Spencer Gulf.
In Whyalla and Port Pirie, there will be future hydrogen plants and in Port Augusta a "green" cement manufacturing plant.
That is if the insatiable appetite for clean energy continues around Australia.
And, according to prominent industry figure Dr Sreeraj Balachandran global executives can work together to switch-over from fossil fuel-powered refiners and smelters.
Already Nyrstar smelter at Port Pirie - also the site of a $750 million hydrogen plant - has links with Hallett to use "black sand" from refining processes as material for "green" cement at Port Augusta.
Dr Balachandran, climate change manager at Rio Tinto Aluminium, is trialling new processes for Queensland and North American operations.
Speaking at a conference in Adelaide, he urged global executives to work together as the task of switching fossil fuel-powered refineries and smelters to new fuels is too great for one sector alone.
Refineries and smelting operations often run their own coal and gas-fired power plants.
Dr Balachandran says electrification of the energy source is the best option as it is efficient and cost-effective.
"But we see hydrogen playing a role where we cannot directly electrify," he said.
He says hydrogen can be used in chemical processes, in transport for fuel cells to power mining and haulage fleets and replace diesel, and could be blended as a liquid fuel for industrial processes.
Rio is trialling hydrogen as a replacement for gas in the alumina refining process at the Yarwun plant near Gladstone in Queensland and has Japan's heavyweight Sumitomo Corporation as a partner for a future hydrogen plant to supply industrial customers.
But hydrogen customers need to be technically ready, having made adjustments to industrial processes, otherwise there is no demand.
The message is that Australia does not have to "de-industrialise" to survive, but things are going to be complicated and costly.
Fertilisers and explosives, alumina and aluminium, iron and steel, cement and cement are on the frontline of the net-zero economy that many big companies and governments have pledged to build by 2050 or before.
Grattan Institute climate change and energy expert Tony Wood told executives at the conference that they have a crucial role in achieving a net-zero world.
"No sector will be immune," he warns.
Using renewable energy and alternative fuels such as hydrogen, many producers are working on new ways to make the products that advanced economies take for granted.
Australian Associated Press
CREDIT: Marion Rae and Greg Mayfield
Word count: 420
