The centre at Adelaide University will be the only one in Australia and among a handful globally focused on critical minerals.
In a world with rising geopolitical tensions, the centre was opening at an extremely important time, Adelaide vice-chancellor Peter Hoj said on Thursday.
“Countries that see things through the prism of national interest will have to make moves themselves to have access to critical minerals,” he said.
Minerals are regarded as critical if they are economically important but supply is vulnerable.
Vulnerability includes scarcity, lack of geographic diversity, supply is from countries with political risks to trade, or where production only occurs as a by-product of another commodity or is uneconomic.
The director of the Australian Critical Minerals Research Centre, Carl Spandler, said there was often only rudimentary knowledge about the minerals.
“There are elements which we’ve really only used in society for the past couple of decades,” he said.
“But they are raw materials which are vital for our transition to a high tech environment where we want renewable energy generation, transport by electric vehicles and a state-of-the-art defence sector to keep us safe.”
The minerals include rare earths, mineral sands, and other elements with South Australia highly prospective for discoveries.
“The timing for opening this centre is perfect,” Energy and Mining Department chief executive Paul Heithersay said.
“Turbines, motors, flat screens, solar panels and other inventions are all part of modern living which rely heavily on critical minerals.
“SA’s capacity to supply critical minerals is extraordinary, we have a huge opportunity to leverage supply chains and create thousands of highly skilled jobs.”
Useful properties of the minerals can include resistance to corrosion, high melting temperatures, hardness, magnetic properties and electrical conductivity.
Often only small quantities of a critical mineral are needed in electronic componentry or in an alloy to make significant improvements.
Aircraft turbines made of nickel-based alloys with 3 per cent of the critical element rhenium can run much hotter, provide double the thrust and reduce emissions of greenhouse gases by more than 60 per cent in comparison to alloys without rhenium.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison has announced the launch of the Resources Technology and Critical Minerals Processing Plan Pathway.
In South Australia, the polymetallic ore body at Olympic Dam contains rare earth elements along with the copper, uranium, gold and silver which are processed commercially.
One of the centre’s first projects, using an Australian Research Council linkage grant, is to work on extracting these elements.
Assoc Prof Sandler said other prospects in SA included clays near Mount Gambier, nickel and mineral sands.
Being able to process rare earths in overburden above copper deposits in the Gawler Craton could swing the economics of a mine.
Assoc Prof Spandler was attracted from Queensland to head the centre. He will work with Prof Nigel Cook and the centre is recruiting four more researchers and administrative staff.
It will support a post-doctoral researcher in conjunction with the SA Museum.
It has places for postgraduates, including PhD positions, to fill.
It has the support of UniSA and aims to work on State Government-funded projects through the Mining and Energy Department.
Word count: 497
