Tasmania's export surge shows no sign of slowing, with the value of overseas sales up by nearly a quarter in the last year.
The estimated value of Tasmanian merchandise exports sent overseas grew by 24.5 per cent to $4.67 billion in the year to April, according to state Treasury analysis of Australian Bureau of Statistics figures.
National growth was 32.1 per cent.
Tasmania had strong gains in the sales value of non-ferrous metals, metallic ores and metal scraps, seafood, dairy products, fruit and vegetables, paper and paperboard and vehicles including vessels during the year.
The sales value of the "other and confidential" category and meat fell back, by nearly a quarter in the case of meat.
Non-ferrous metals (35.6 per cent) and metallic ores and metal scraps (29.2 per cent) accounted for 64.8 per cent of total export value.
"Resources, particularly the mining and mineral processing sector, provide the lion's share of our exports by value ...," Resources Minister Guy Barnett said on Thursday.
"Collectively, the sector supports more than 10,000 direct and indirect jobs across the state and is at the centre of many regional communities."
IN OTHER NEWS: Tubby McGee, Noodle - the Coast's most popular dog names revealed
He said the state budget included $1 million in new funding "to back the sector, supporting more jobs in regional Tasmania and encouraging new investment".
Mr Barnett said that included $800,000 over four years to support Mineral Resources Tasmania "in providing enhanced services and information to the minerals and construction sectors, which are currently in a phase of strong growth".
IN OTHER NEWS:
'Disgraceful': Survivor advocate lashes sex abuser's jail sentence
Model railway owners set for new journey
Elderly crash victim's $22k watch missing at hospital
Mainland China remained easily Australia's biggest export market, accounting for 35.2 per cent of export value during the year.
South Korea (12.4 per cent) was the next biggest, followed in order by Thailand, Taiwan, Japan and the US.
Mineral exploration spending in Tasmania is also increasing strongly, according to ABS figures, as mining companies and hopefuls look for the next wave of export dollar-earning deposits.
MORE NEWS:Elderly crash victim's $22k watch missing at hospital
Wynyard-based exploration drilling company edrill Australia's general manager, Stephen Poke, said strong prices and the drive towards renewable energy were fuelling the exploration bounce.
"Gold's been strong for a long time and the other base metals are coming into play - tin, nickel, zinc - and the mines are healthy again," Mr Poke said.
Mr Poke said the "big takeaway" from a recent drilling conference in Adelaide was: "This is a green boom, a renewables boom, and it's being driven by green policies."
"They're saying you can't go green without mining.
"They want batteries, they want renewables and that ain't going to happen without mining."
While you're with us, did you know that you can now sign up to receive breaking news updates and daily headlines direct to your inbox? Sign up here.
CREDIT: Sean Ford
Word count: 497
