Anyone who’s driven in Norway will know there’s never a need to worry about where you’ll get your next EV battery top-up.
From shopping centre carparks and airports to service stations and private homes, you’re never far away from some extra electrons in Norway where there are more than 16,000 charging locations for a population of fewer than 16 million.
In Australia, it’s a very different story.
While it’s possible to drive from Adelaide to Cairns using a network of fast chargers, it also requires a lot of planning – and a little luck that all those chargers will be working as advertised. Oh, and you’ll also need to hope there’s no one else already plugged in, something that’s becoming increasingly common as more EVs hit the road.
Fortunately, the situation with charging is changing.
Every state and territory has plans to increase their charging networks, while the Albanese government has also committed funding to expand the number of public chargers.
Collectively, hundreds of millions of dollars are earmarked to ensure EV drivers have access to plenty of chargers on the road.
The NSW government has been one of the most bullish, already budgeting $171m to expand the state’s charging network, in conjunction with partners such as the NRMA.
The state government plans to blanket regional NSW into towns as remote as Bourke and Broken Hill. It also plans to have a fast charger within 5km of every home in Sydney.
It’s a similar story in the west, with the WA government committing to what it says will be the world’s longest continuous EV fast-charging network, stretching from the Nullarbor Plain on the South Australian border to Kununurra in the Kimberley.
But there’s a lot more to come nationwide.
In a report released earlier this year, the Electric Vehicle Council said there were 291 public fast-charging locations in Australia and another 1580 slower charging locations, many with multiple plugs.
There are also hundreds more destination chargers, which provide a trickle of electricity for longer stops, such as overnight at a hotel or winery.
Even fuel suppliers are turning to electricity, with Ampol among the most active; it plans to have about 120 sites providing renewable energy on its forecourts by next October.
“Our vision is to develop a best-in-class EV charging ecosystem enabling the rollout of our own charging assets and allowing us to partner with others to form Australia’s leading EV charging network,” Ampol said.
“The recent opening of our first AmpCharge sites is part of the first-stage rollout of fast-charging technology to sites across our national retail network,” said Brent Merrick, Ampol’s executive general manager, International and New Business.
Those charging stations are servicing around 50,000 EVs out of a fleet of 20 million vehicles – but the number of EVs is expected to double pretty quickly, before growing exponentially as federal incentives are leveraged and more models added.
The Electric Vehicle Council says there have been government commitments to more than triple the size of the existing fast-charging network.
But that’s still way short of Norway, especially considering our population and land mass. Norway is about half the size of NSW, our most populous state, highlighting another challenge of keeping EVs moving across the world’s sixth-largest country.
There’s also the challenge of ensuring Australians can charge cars at or near their homes where 80 per cent of all electric-car charging will take place.
For the 2.5 million unit dwellers in Australia, that’s often a ­bigger challenge – especially in older blocks where wiring may not be ready for chargers.
Tim Watson, head of infrastructure at installer Jetcharge, said while there were challenges there were also solutions.
“Almost all existing brownfield buildings have not been set up to incorporate the load that electric-vehicle charging will bring, so we do energy management that allows them to get five times as many charging stations as they otherwise would.” While we may not get to the charging density of Norway, Australia is at least heading towards somewhere more friendly to drive – and charge – an EV.
CREDIT: Toby Hagon
Word count: 679
