Woolworths yesterday announced it will phase out reusable plastic bags gradually in a sustainability push.
Over the next 12 months, Woolworths and its sister business Big W will start removing reusable bags from stores. The bags are sold for 15¢ and can be recycled only at Redcycle stations within the company's stores.
Woolworths' managing director of supermarkets Natalie Davis said the reusable bags had played their part after it dropped single-use plastic bags in 2018, but now, shoppers brought their own bags to the store.
"We've seen a huge shift in shopping habits since we stopped giving out single-use plastic bags. Eight out of 10 customers now bring their own bags from home," she said. "The reusable plastic bags have played their part, and now it's time to do away with selling plastic shopping bags for good."
The move will take more than 9000 tonnes of plastic out of circulation annually.
Rival Coles is not yet following suit. A company spokesperson said it would continue to offer reusable plastic bags.
"Coles has introduced paper shopping bags for WA customers to buy ahead of a state government ban on plastic shopping bags that comes into effect on July 1. We have also trialled offering paper shopping bags in other states," the spokesperson said.
"Outside of WA, we are continuing to offer customers reusable Coles Better Bags made with 80 per cent recycled plastic, as well as marine reusable shopping bags made with 20 per cent marine waste plastic."
Coles' bags can also be recycled only at Redcycle stations.
Both supermarkets are on sustainability pushes, targeting 100 per cent renewable energy across their operations by 2025. They are also removing unnecessary packaging.
Under new plastics laws in Western Australia, both supermarkets have removed reusable bags in that state. Woolworths said the next states in line would be South Australia and the Northern Territory.
The company will continue to offer paper bags for 20¢, and plastic bags for fruit and vegetables will also be available.
CREDIT: Dominic Powell
Word count: 335
