The Coalition promised its "gas-led recovery" would lead to lower energy prices ("Cold snap fires new fear over gas price", June 2). What has our millions of dollars of subsidies to the sector gained us?
Graeme Finn, Summer Hill
Humanity certainly does not require another nuclear power plant. We are already gifted with the largest nuclear power plant in the solar system.
It is a star called the sun and it supplies daily and forever enough energy to supply the Earth's needs several times over. Long may
it shine.
Cornelius van der Weyden,
Balmain East
In dinosaur years, it was only yesterday Malcolm Turnbull and his then energy minister Josh Frydenberg ridiculed Jay Weatherill for transitioning South Australia to renewable energy. It now has the cheapest and most reliable energy in Australia.
Scott Morrison and Angus Taylor boasted energy prices would always be cheaper under the Coalition, allowing contracts to multinationals to exploit our vast resources for their corporate profit to export our gas, now leaving Australia facing a domestic crisis.
At every opportunity leading up to the 2025 election, voters must be reminded of this Coalition legacy.
Howard Charles, Annandale
We are now facing an energy price crisis which has one upside - there never was a greater incentive to reduce electricity and gas consumption by every possible affordable means. At the low-cost end, there are low-energy LED light bulbs, draught excluders for doors, thicker curtains, woolly jumpers and blankets.
More costly but extremely effective are double-glazed windows, magnetic induction cooktops, solar hot water systems and rooftop photovoltaic cells.
Unfortunately, battery storage is still expensive, but a storage heater can be charged using solar electricity during the day and the heat discharged at night.
Geoff Harding, Chatswood
Perhaps we could reconsider reversing gas pricing? We could stop sending gas overseas at giveaway prices and prioritise Australian citizens/consumers at more reasonable rates.
Nino Pol, Randwick
Our new government has barely been sworn in and they face the same problems as the previous government. Gas and electricity prices soar just when we need energy the most. Do they subsidise and increase the debt they have criticised, or do they ignore the people who voted them into power or let them freeze? Oh, how easy the next job always looks until you get there. Our new incumbents should remember to ask two critical questions before they make decisions. Does it make sense, and is it a good deal for Australia?
D'Arcy Hardy, North Turramurra
The Coalition wasted 10 years. If Scott Morrison had held up a photo of the sun and announced that we don't need to be afraid of this, by now we would have an energy market dominated by renewables. Electric and hydrogen cars and trucks would dominate our roads. And miners would have productive jobs as tradies and farmers. Instead, my region of limitless sunshine is powered by diesel generators.
David Neilson, Araluen (NT)
CREDIT:
Word count: 486
