POWER prices will soar by at least 35 per cent in 2023 amid a choppy energy transition and the closure of coal plants, one of the nation’s biggest electricity retailer says.
The forecast is another blow for households and businesses already hit by skyrocketing utility bills and living costs.
Opposition Leader Peter Dutton has declared energy “the biggest issue of our time”, with some struggling families already forced to choose ­between heating or eating.
“Next year using the current market prices, tariffs are going up a minimum 35 per cent,” Alinta chief executive Jeff Dimery told an energy conference in Sydney.
“There are real issues around energy pricing that we’ve got right now. “It’s horrendous, it’s unpalatable. We don’t want energy consumers getting their power bills and setting fire to them.” One of the big three retailers, Origin Energy, said wholesale prices indicated a leap in electricity prices was likely to hit the market once new tariffs were set in July 2023.
EnergyAustralia chief executive Mark Collette said soaring wholesale prices would flow through to households.
“Just go back a year, wholesale electricity prices are up four times from $60 per megawatt hour to $240,” he said.
“Gas is up from $10 a gigajoule to $50 on the current ACCC netback. “That’s four or five times, and it’s massive. It’s putting a lot of upward pressure on ­tariffs.” Mr Dutton said families were struggling to pay the bills now, let alone if they rose 35 per cent in a year’s time.
He claimed the government’s renewable energy agenda was driving up prices. “And if coalmines are closed prematurely, or coal-fired power stations, if there is a disruption to the gas supply in this country what is going to firm up renewables?” Mr Dutton said.
“The battery in South Australia lasts for 75 minutes. You've got hydrogen that might be a reality in a decade’s time. You’ve got some hydro in this scheme but really at the margins.
“You need to be able to firm up that energy, and Labor is putting us on a path to not only have huge increases in electricity and gas bills, but also to make it unreliable.” The rapid exit of at least five coal power plants this decade will require 45 gigawatts of new power supply by 2030 – almost the entire capacity of the present national electricity market.
But the Energy Security Board says extensions of coal plants beyond their closure dates is not required and there is no need to contemplate a plan B in the energy transition.
“The last thing anybody wants to see is any extension to the lives of coal-fired power stations,” ESB chairwoman Anna Collyer said.
“We are doing what we wanted to do, which is to bring that (their closures) forward.” jade.gailberger@news.com.au
CREDIT: PERRY WILLIAMS JADE GAILBERGER
Word count: 470
