Rock on, Daniel I've long admired the creative genius of Daniel Johns, right back to his Silverchair days, and have been enjoying his new solo album. How sad that he is still struggling, seemingly unable to cope with life without self-medicating with alcohol ("To be predictable is my worst nightmare", Apr 23-24). We should all hope that his period in rehab will set him on a course of happiness and contentment.
Sally Pierce Hobart, Tas
Daniel Johns, another master of inventive, artistic modern music, could embrace the spirit of Saint Francis of Assisi for his inner health, contentment and happiness: look outwards rather than inwards.
John Dobinson Herston, Qld
What an amazing photo of Daniel Johns by Nic Walker (page 14, Apr 23-24). The rock solid gaze of Daniel seeing into the past or future (who knows which?) juxtaposed with the fluid motion of water. Cannot stop looking at it.
Del Pudney Westlakes, SA
I disagree with Andrew McMillen. Nick Cave is Australia's greatest living rock star and composer.
Tim O'Brien Margaret River, WA
Life after coal Thank you, Greg Bearup, for amplifying the voices of those working in the coal industry ("Power shift", Apr 23-24).
Our energy workers have provided us with reliable electricity for decades and deserve appreciation, respect and support in the face of an uncertain future. It is time the scare campaigns about "transitioning" to renewable energy sources are replaced with honest conversations, prudent planning and investment in jobs that allow those in the regions to prosper in a way that is safe for both workers and the environment.
Amy Hiller Kew, Vic
Broad palate The cooks and chefs who each week share their recipes and favourite meals have enriched my life, and no doubt that of thousands of readers. These pages give us insight into the wonderful variety of foods and cooking styles now available in this country.
Marina Hamilton-Craig Encounter Bay, SA
More to the point James Halliday has a well-deserved reputation for excellence in the wine industry. Perhaps he could be persuaded to review the rating system wherein almost all wines are rated between 92 and 97 with some outliers at 90, 91 or 99. This doesn't sufficiently distinguish between wines and seems a poor use of a 100-point system. Perhaps he could develop a new system that provides wine consumers with clearer guidance and, if possible, persuade others like Robert Parker (US) to adopt it.
Gary Scanlan Stafford Heights, Qld
Kids and screens Oh Nikki, I wish I could change my mind on kids and screens ("I got it wrong", Apr 23-24). I acknowledge screens and socials are the way of communion for young people and that balance is the key, however my greatest fear is for young impressionable girls. Your paper quoted Meta internal research admitting that Instagram makes body image issues worse for one in three girls. As a primary school physical education teacher I see an increase in young girls and boys presenting with body image issues and eating disorders.
My anger is palpable that these platforms go unregulated in Australia. I am yet to be convinced that screens and socials are worth the potential pain. Jo Bayes Camberwell, Vic
Yes Nikki, you got it right. While screen time has saved many a physically absent relationship, "the trick is [in] the balance".
Judith Thomas North Adelaide, SA
Wishful thinking My first port of call when The Weekend Australian lobs is the Magazine. Stories and columns can uplift, aggravate or stimulate, but if you can't get anything out of Gemmell, Salt, Adams or Lethlean you're just not trying. Last weekend (April 23-24) the mag took me on an "I wish" tour. Why can't I write like Gwen Harwood, hoon around in a Tesla 3 and garage it in a grand old villa in Medindie? By lunch I'd settled down to Bernard Salt's more selfless column.
Rosemary O'Brien Ashfield, NSW
More laughs, please I could not agree more with Phillip Adams ("Blood on their hands", Apr 23-24). The amount of violence in film and TV is ridiculous.
Surely somebody can produce something funny, like Monty Python or Mother and Son. After floods, fires and drought, I want to laugh. Please help!
Peter Carruth Port Macquarie, NSW
Thank you for saying what I have long believed. Once upon a time violence was only hinted at in the movies.
Now it's in our faces.
Pamela Owens Mt Mellum, Qld
WIN!
Marie Montafia of Ayr, Qld wins a Husqvarna Viking Opal 650 Sewing Machine, RRP $1690, for writing April's best letter.
Write to: magazinefeedback@theaustralian.com.au The Weekend Australian Magazine, GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001. Letters must bear a full address and contact number and may be edited for clarity and length.
Word count: 786
