TIFFANY Cromwell is the talented South Australian cycling export with formula one legs beneath her, a formula one heart within her, and a Formula One man alongside her.
Canyon/SRAM Racing’s team leader Cromwell has endured the difficulties of the 2020 cycling season in COVID-ravaged Europe with renewed enthusiasm, inspired by her boyfriend, Finnish F1 driver Valtteri Bottas.
The pair have been together for a year and Bottas was secretly in Adelaide during the Tour Down Under in January, even donning the lycra himself and racing for Norwood in a club criterium around Victoria Park.
Throughout the European summer, Cromwell has been a regular in Bottas’ Mercedes garage on race day, while Bottas is often spotted roadside to cheer on Cromwell in the UCI Women’s World Tour.
“It’s definitely been quite a change in life,” Cromwell, now residing in Monaco, said.
“Of course F1 is a completely different world, but having him by my side has been amazing. He’s so understanding of the demands of professional sport “And I’ve done the same with his sport and what it means to him. “It’s been different and nice to be able to balance both our sports together. “That’s what you want, because when you have two professional sports people, it can become one-sided because sports people have to be selfish.
“I think we’ve got a really nice balance, where I’ve been fortunate to go to many of his races and his team has been really welcoming to me.” The pair are both enjoying an upsurge in their professional careers. Following an extended layoff, Cromwell has been back stalking the head of the peloton throughout the series of day-long Autumn classics in Belgium, while Bottas is second in the Drivers Championship behind Mercedes teammate Lewis Hamilton. He has won twice this year, in Austria and Russia, and enjoyed six other podium finishes.
Cromwell uses her time with the Mercedes crew to better understand aerodynamics and technology for her own cycling.
“I think that’s what’s helped my get my motivation back, having someone that supports me and believes in me,” she said.
“I know how much work goes into a win behind the scenes. It takes everything to go right. You can be the best driver and not have luck go your way.
“I’ve seen all the ups and downs, so to see him win is fantastic. It’s nice to be there in support.” “The world title is his dream and obviously Lewis (Hamilton) is a fierce competitor, but it’s not over yet for this year.
“It’s pretty special to be part of that and ride the wave together.” Cromwell says the ongoing challenges of the pandemic may make it difficult to return home for the summer.
“For now, we may do Christmas in Finland for something different,” she said. “But hopefully I can get home sooner rather than later.
“I’ll be sad if I can’t get back to Adelaide for my Aussie summer and to see my family.”
BACKWELL TAKES OVER 2016 Adelaide Footy League premiership coach Brett Backwell has returned to the competition to coach Brighton Bombers next winter.
Backwell, a Magarey Medallist with Glenelg in 2006, steered Prince Alfred Old Collegians for four seasons, including their first Division One Premiership.
He replaces club legend Joel Tucker, who led Brighton into Division One after claiming the Division 3 Premiership in 2017.
COMBE WINS COUNT WHILE the mid-north town of Crystal Brook was celebrating its Magarey Medallist Campbell Combe on Monday night, Maitland on the Yorke Peninsula was toasting SA hockey’s new number one star on Wednesday.
Port Adelaide’s Scott Germein took out the Hockey SA Premier League best and fairest award in a tight count, shading Burnside’s Simon Brown and Todd Kitto of Seacliff by three votes.
Germein grew up in Maitland before attending boarding school at St Peters and studying aerospace engineering at Adelaide University.
The women’s award was won by Hockeyroo rookie Miki Spano, who became Adelaide’s first winner in 22-years.
Spano survived a nail-biter poll by three votes from Burnside star Euleena MacLachlan.
Dual winner and prolific vote-getter Amy Hunt of Adelaide Uni was third.
HELMET HEAVE-HO COMMUNITY cricket’s compulsory helmet laws, introduced last summer, were officially relaxed this week ahead of yesterday’s opening round across Adelaide.
The laws made the wearing of helmets compulsory for batters, close-in fielders and wicketkeepers standing at the stumps last year, as part of ICC directives to satisfy Cricket Australia and its insurers.
The law was vehemently opposed by a broad section of the community cricket community, particularly in lower grades where dangerous bowling is rare.
While the Adelaide Turf Cricket Association continues to recommend the use of helmets, players are no longer obliged to do so and games can go ahead with a batter not wearing a helmet.
For cricket players under the age of 18, a helmet is still compulsory.
HONOURS TO NUTT STEWART Nutt has produced perhaps SA’s most remarkable half season of rugby union.
Old Collegians forward Nutt took out the prestigious Don Smith Medal for best and fairest player in the RUSA Premier League on Wednesday night, despite missing the first six of the 14-game season. He won by a solitary vote from Burnside’s Sean Meredith.
Woodville’s Zahn Anthony was awarded the Edna Reilly Memorial Cup for Women’s League best player.
BLOOMIN’ FINE SERVICE HIGHERCOMBE Golf Club yesterday honoured Jill Wildy for 50 years of outstanding service by bestowing her with life membership yesterday.
Wildy first joined Highercombe as a 30-year-old and turned 80 last month. “She is still playing and enjoying the fact she is involved still and commits herself to help out in any way possible,” Highercombe’s Dennis Gregory said.
“She has been in charge of all of the flower arrangements. I have nicknamed her ‘The Boss Lady of the Blooms’.”
Dedman’s Delight ROY Dedman was recognised for his unwavering commitment to SA hockey on Wednesday night, receiving the prestigious Outstanding Service Award And while Dedman was visibly moved by the honour, he’s even more thrilled about the U15 girls’ grand final he will umpire today. Dedman’s co-umpire will be his 16-year-old grand-daughter Tia. The pair were in charge of the two U15 semi-finals last weekend.
CREDIT: BEN HOOK
Word count: 1033
