Port Pirie's smelter workers will have their jobs further protected under a $400 million project in Hobart that was to be sealed in the Budget.
Nyrstar Australia's vice-president Dale Webb said federal funding of $50 million towards the venture would strengthen the job security of hundreds of Port Pirie workers.
The funding under the Budget will help to build a new electrolysis plant in Hobart.
"The announcement again shows the value of what we do in Australia and the importance of this new plant to our sector and Tasmania," Mr Webb said.
"This ensures that the next generation of employees and businesses in Tasmania will continue to play an important role in the manufacturing of zinc, a mineral critical for the transition to a low-carbon world.
"It secures the long-term sustainability of 1300 direct jobs and more than 5000 indirect jobs in Hobart and through Nyrstar's linked operations in Port Pirie."
The project, also backed by the Tasmanian Government, will start in 2022, take about 28 months to build and will employ 200 people at the peak of construction.
Industry Minister Ed Husic said the project would "modernise" the Hobart zinc smelter.
"This investment will be delivered in the Budget, fulfilling a Labor Party election commitment," he said.
He said the smelter was a major contributor to the Tasmanian economy, securing local jobs.
"This investment will help strengthen Australia's sovereign manufacturing capability of valuable metals necessary to our transition to net-zero by 2050," he said.
According to the government, the company says this will secure the long-term sustainability of 650 jobs in Hobart and another thousand positions at Port Pirie.
Further, the company says the facility will support jobs for more than 5000 people in direct-supply chain companies in Tasmania and country South Australia.
"Nyrstar plays a vital role in the production and supply of metals such as zinc, lead, silver and copper," Mr Husic said.
"This upgrade will create an advanced manufacturing facility, helping to secure a long-term future for zinc metal refining in Australia."
He said the government was focused on ensuring a greater share of Australia's raw materials are processed in the nation.
About 90 per cent of the company's raw material zinc for processing comes from on-shore.
"Our investment in Nyrstar is one part of building that capability with more to come through our $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund," he said.
Zinc is a vital input for critical supply chains, including renewable energy infrastructure, building materials and anti-corrosion coatings on steel.
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 418
