ELECTRIFYING TRANSPORT IT'S GREAT to see our mostly renewable electricity now replacing smelly old petrol and diesel "EV Infrastructure punches above its weight" (The Examiner, August 9).
While the rest of Australia struggles with coal and gas-fired electricity and providing EV chargers across vast distances, Tasmanian transport will be able to electrify much sooner.
While the vast majority of EV charging is done at home via normal power points, it's good to know that drivers will be able to road trip all over the state with easy access to fast chargers. Regional businesses will really benefit as more and more local and interstate drivers top up their cars at the expanding network of chargers.
Well done Tas.
Hannah Sadler, Wynyard. AIRPORT UPGRADE PRIORITIES Launceston airport has a lovely ambiance and upgrades are always welcome but, as we get older, a major priority is getting wheelchair-bound passengers on and off the plane in a timely manner. That means the single lift operating in the rain needs upgrading urgently.
Michael House, Launceston. ABOLISH PARKING FEES I THINK parking fees are ridiculous and the government should abolish them and let us park for free.
It isn't fair that we have to deal with the high cost of living as well as parking fees.
We shouldn't have to pay for parking in the first place.
John Schofield, Bellerive. US CLIMATE WIN THE United States House of Representatives has just approved a major bill to fight climate change, with the Inflation Reduction Act committing $US530 billion on clean energy initiatives. This includes billions of dollars in subsidies for industries investing in renewable technology.
Not only that, Americans will benefit from various incentives such as $A13 billion in rebates to electrify their homes, and tax credits of about $A11,000 to electrify their cars; saving them money and creating jobs in the process.
The clean energy race is on, and Australia needs to keep up. The federal Labor government is legislating a climate change bill that targets renewable energy transmission and reducing emissions of big businesses.
However, Australian domestic emissions need to be addressed too, and can be achieved through incentives such as subsidising electrical appliances and energy-efficient measures, rooftop solar and batteries.
There is much to learn from the US's historic climate win. The Albanese government will be wise to learn from our climate ally.
Ching Ang, Magill, South Australia.
CREDIT:
Word count: 395
