Rotterdam: Europe's biggest hydrogen project is stepping up its search for Australian imports to help quadruple supplies of clean energy and cut the continent's reliance on natural gas in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Seeking millions of tonnes of hydrogen imports, the Port of Rotterdam wants to scale up the supply of Australian hydrogen in one of the world's biggest projects to import and generate the clean and transportable fuel.
But Australia is in a race with other countries to generate hydrogen from solar and wind at enough scale to export energy in vast quantities to meet a European Union goal of using 20 million tonnes of hydrogen each year by 2030, up from a target of only 5 million before the energy crisis.
Shell will commit to the biggest hydrogen generation scheme in Europe on Wednesday when Netherlands Prime Minister Mark Rutte announces the project with the energy giant's executives at the Port of Rotterdam, aiming to provide stored energy from wind power in the North Sea.
The Port of Rotterdam runs the hydrogen project, and president Allard Castelein said his team had looked at more than a dozen countries and concluded Australia could produce hydrogen at a competitive price due to the cost profile of its renewable energy sources, even after adding the cost of shipping to the Netherlands. "If you look at the energy demands in northwest Europe, it's inconceivable that we will be self-sufficient in energy," he said. "We could put all the windmills offshore, they could become bigger and more powerful than they currently are, but still we would run out of space. So we will always need to be a net importer.
"And from our assessments, it appears that Australia is in a very strong position to be one of the supply sources. Not the only supply source, to be honest. But there is a lot of confirmation that Australia is a very efficient area to produce green hydrogen."
In a test of the model, Australia supplied liquid hydrogen by ship to Japan in January from Victoria's Port of Hastings under a $500 million scheme using brown coal to produce the gas.
Castelein said that Australia was in a "good and strong position" to supply the fuel at a time when the war in Ukraine highlighted Europe's dependence on Russian gas and the need for renewable alternatives.
"Europe will have a very, very hard time dealing with an abrupt supply disruption, which is not unlikely to materialise," he said.
"Europe as a continent will not be able to replace gas for gas."
The Port of Rotterdam is the transfer point for 13 per cent of Europe's fossil fuel imports - oil, coal and LNG - but is moving to clean energy with a mix of hydrogen imports and domestic generation. It wants to achieve commercial production and imports of hydrogen from 2025 so it can scale this up to 4.6 million tonnes each year from 2030, about one quarter of the forecast for the EU.
The EU plan assumes half the hydrogen will come from imports, highlighting the opportunity for Australia when countries such as Chile, Uruguay and Iceland are also planning hydrogen projects and Saudi Arabia wants to become a major hydrogen producer after decades of dominance in oil.
The Port of Rotterdam has early agreements with Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania but the most advanced appears to be with South Australia, where Premier Peter Malinauskas has plans for a $593 million hydrogen plant, triggering warnings about the financial risk.
Castelein said one advantage for Australia was its history in fuel exports while the other was its ability to produce hydrogen at about one-third of the cost of north-west Europe, the result of better solar and wind power, given the differences in climate.
CREDIT: David Crowe Chief political correspondent
Word count: 639
