FAST RAIL PLANS MORELIKE FARCE RAIL AGAIN STATE Transport Infrastructure Minister Jacinta Allan has announced that construction on the current Geelong fast rail project is due to start in 2023, four years after the state and federal governments announced they would partner to deliver the key infrastructure.
Is this a continuation of the fast rail project on the Geelong line announced by the Bracks government in 1999 and supposedly completed in 2005?
The Bracks project, after many delays and hiccups, was fittingly dubbed the “farce rail” project.
If the Andrews government’s record of managing major projects is anything to go by this could well end up being “farce rail #2”?
John Withers, Torquay
PRIVATISE NBN CO TO STOP WASTE OF OUR MONEY RECENT reporting (GA, 26/5) about Australia’s major telcos’ exasperated plea for good sense at NBN Co is unsurprising.
The project is 15 years old, has cost more than $51bn and its greatest achievement is being a millstone around the neck of the telecommunications industry.
It seems the telcos are at a point where they are begging for good governance in the project.
If the telcos had any sense, they would be lobbying for immediate privatisation. Before Rudd and Swan initiated the reckless (and bipartisan) spending that will define our generation, the major telcos were all investigating fibre optic cable initiatives.
Once the NBN was announced, all these initiatives dried up.
After all, why would a company invest shareholders’ capital if government has promised to coerce taxpayers to the same end?
Rational self-interest saw broad telco support for government to provide a solution the free market already had under way.
What we have now is an expensive project that is finding it exceptionally difficult to pay its own way. To the extent it has provided better services to some households with poor network access, it has done so at enormous cost that all Australians will repay for decades to come.
In Geelong, consumers with access to the iiNet cable network scoff at the comparatively expensive and poor performance of the NBN offerings.
Had the free market been free to innovate and provide a quality product in a fiscally responsible manner, we wouldn’t be bemoaning such waste that has no end in sight.
I won’t hold my breath, but the best thing for the telecommunications industry and the Australian public, is for NBN Co to be privatised.
Sell the network on the open market and allow the new owners to restructure and find efficiencies where they can.
To do otherwise is to continue wasting taxpayers’ money and our children’s inheritance.
Scott Harrison, Norlane
FOCUS ON MINERALS TO BOOST ELECTRIC VEHICLES SURELY John Calvert (GA, 24/5) can find something a bit more recent than a 2009 US report to back up his highly misleading claims about comparative electricity prices.
He may also be interested in some facts about fossil fuel price subsidies. Fossil fuel subsidies cost Australians a staggering $11.6bn in 2021-22, an increase of $1.3bn in the last year, according to new Australia Institute research.
Of course, this is current research, not 2009 overseas nonsense. Soaring coal prices are driving up power costs in NSW and Queensland. The states that burn the most black coal and use the least renewable energy, NSW and Queensland, have the highest wholesale power prices.
Tasmania, Victoria and South Australia with higher renewable use have the lowest. In the first quarter of the year, NSW’s wholesale price was $87 a megawatt hour, up 129 per cent from $38 a megawatt hour this time last year. In Queensland, the wholesale price hit $150, up 248 per cent from $43.
Australia should phase out fossil fuel subsidies and concentrate on supporting our massive reserves of cobalt, lithium and nickel to help satisfy worldwide demand for materials so necessary to accelerate production of electric vehicles. Geoff Foster, Cygnet
Word count: 640
