WHO WILL POLICE PATHWAYS?
Trying to modify the behaviour of cyclists on shared paths, with the rules, is a path too far! Who are the bike and e-scooter police, enforcing the laws governing cyclists, skateboard riders and scooters? Where are they? Do they exist? The rule for shared paths, like the rule for sea craft, is: “Power gives way to sail.” Reform to the laws protecting the public from potential interactions with electric and other vehicles on pathways, is hypothetical, not practical and difficult, if not impossible, to enforce. In the case of an accident, where walkers collide with these pathway vehicles, who is there to record the incident and report? In many incidents, fast getaways are the norm, especially when the incident is without witnesses. Considering many of the elderly tend to walk on pathways, they play Russian roulette, subjected to speeding riders. Many are frail and any fall is critical. Children are also at risk on shared pathways, considering their lack of safety awareness, especially when very young. All of us have a right to walk safely on pathways open to the public. No-one has a right of way, just because their mode of transport is electric or has wheels. The sea rule applies to pathways also.
The revised law for e-scooters, after many dangerous incidents involving speeding riders, has reduced the speed limit for e-scooters, to 12 km per hour. All moving vehicles need a bell or similar means of warning, approaching pedestrians. However, who is prepared to police this new status for e-scooters, knowing other vehicles on pathways more often than not, don’t use, or have a bell for warning. Speeding past walkers without warning is an accident waiting to happen.
ELOISE ROWE, Tannum Sands.
WE CAN KEEP THE LIGHTS ON Wiener Schmidlin shouldn’t be afraid of the dark (Letters, TB, 6/8). He should rejoice that we live in the best country in the world for making renewable energy. Townsville is well placed to reap the resulting jobs.
Because of our large size and low population, we could meet our energy needs with solar panels on less than one per cent of our vast, sunny land. And, if we were actually serious about becoming the world’s superpower, as many economists and entrepreneurs think we should be, we could generate enough electricity to power the whole world on just one-fifth of the current range occupied by sheep and cattle.
Now, powering the world is not on the agenda but I reckon these figures show that with a bit of effort we will be able to keep the lights on. And we shouldn’t forget the rapid improvements in electric battery storage. It’s just four and a half years since Elon Musk delivered South Australia’s “world’s biggest battery” with just 100MW but CEP Energy is now planning a 1200MW battery at Kurri Kurri in NSW. Last year, Australia installed more than 1000MW (1GW). Queensland is dragging the chain but our first big battery, at Wandoan South will soon be up and running. As energy analyst, Bruce Mountain said recently “The critical issue is storage, storage, storage.” Maybe this is the area we need to wake up to.
JOHN SHUTE, Edgehill.
Word count: 531
