EV or not EV? To the Environment Minister, who is all in with electric cars, that’s not even a question
According to the International Energy Agency, a 31-country intergovernmental organisation, including Australia, nuclear power plants present one of the most cost-effective investment opportunities for low-carbon generation.
It references a report from the OECD’s Nuclear Energy Agency, which analysed more than 180 plants covering 22 countries and argues “nuclear energy costs remain in line with the cost of other base load technologies”.
These observations are at odds with federal Climate Change and Energy Minister Chris Bowen’s assertion that the adoption of nuclear energy in Australia “would push up power prices and crowd out cheaper and cleaner technologies”.
“Firmed renewables are quicker to build and cheaper to operate. Those who say otherwise are either dangerously ignorant or simply seeking to perpetuate the climate wars.” If nuclear energy is more expensive, as Mr Bowen claims, it is unclear why it would crowd out “cheaper, cleaner, technologies”.
After all, when heavily subsidised renewable energy like solar and wind are available, they get priority in the dispatch order. The minister ignores that solar and wind are unreliable even with battery storage.
Indeed, to avoid looming blackouts, the Energy Security Board recommends coal and gas plants be paid to have generation capacity available.
No doubt these charges will be attributed to the non-renewable sector in a cost-shifting exercise designed to ensure renewables are cheaper come what may.
The minister also seems unaware that small modular reactors can be built in locations not traditionally suitable for nuclear power plants. These include the sites of retired coal plants which allow them to take advantage of existing infrastructure.
And they are especially suitable for remote communities, an important consideration in Australia.
Sadly, Chris Bowen demonstrates all the enthusiasm and naivety of Greta Thunberg. His latest frolic is targeting fuel emissions standards to accelerate the uptake of electric vehicles.
EVs currently account for just two per cent of new cars sales in Australia and Mr Bowen wants a new national electric vehicle strategy: “To me, this is ultimately about choice. And policy settings are denying Australians real choice of good, affordable, no-emissions cars.” What the minister really means is that without consumer and taxpayer subsidies, EVs are expensive.
Missing from Mr Bowen’s grand vision is where the new EV owners will charge their purchases.
Service stations are limited by grid capacity and space. Apartment blocks similarly. Most apartment blocks are not wired for such loads and would have to be upgraded.
This is a typical cart before horse exercise. Even if the grids could cope, there is not enough reliable energy being generated to meet the increased demand from intended EV sales.
Then there is the question of safety. Evidence from overseas has shown charging electric vehicles parked in private and public carparks is a fire risk even when fully charged.
Chevrolet has recently had to recall 64,000 Volt EVs – the second recall of its kind — advising its customers that the cars could spontaneously combust. It has offered owners a $6000 cash rebate if they undertake not to sue.
Unlike most car fires, EV flames can be extremely challenging to extinguish, as several incidents have vividly demonstrated.
In Paris the public transport operator temporarily suspended the operation of 149 electric buses after two of its vehicles caught fire.
India has experienced multiple cases of spontaneously combusting electric vehicles while a ship crammed with EVs bound for America caught fire and sank.
Closer to home, a house in Adelaide went up in flames after an e-bike battery caught alight and exploded.
There’s also the matter of cobalt, a key component in EV batteries. Sixty per cent of the world’s supply comes from the Democratic Republic of the Congo where children as young as 7 mine it.
And maybe EVs are not be as environmentally friendly as Mr Bowen would have us believe.
A study sponsored by the Swedish Energy Agency and the Swedish Transport Administration addressing EV battery manufacture found that due to emissions released in the manufacturing process, “EV batteries start life with a significant CO2 deficit that will only be worked off over time when compared to an internal combustion engine car”.
The study concedes EVs do have an advantage in driving-related emissions versus ICE vehicles, but cleaner conventional engines and, a bigger renewable mix, could increase the EV disadvantage.
Using US EPA methodology, the study estimates CO2 emissions from multiple batteries leaves a sinkhole in EV battery manufacture of between three and 5.4 years compared to conventional car driving.
Based on BMW’s consumption claims, this is equivalent to 50,000 kilometres driving in a BMW 5 series diesel.
And then there’s waste disposal. In Australia only about two per cent of lithium-ion batteries are recycled compared to about 95 per cent for lead-acid batteries. The waste typically ends up in landfills where it can potentially cause soil, water and air pollution. Does Mr Bowen have a plan for this? Or is he so consumed by green ideology that no price is too high?
And it must surely be zeal or inexperience which drives Chris Bowen and Labor to push for a 43 per cent 2030 emissions reduction target. They know that 71 per cent of Australia’s energy comes from fossil fuels and the target is delusional. It was expected that once in government, Labor’s approach to climate would be more sensible. Mr Bowen’s behaviour in office has dashed all that.
CREDIT: MAURICE NEWMAN
Word count: 916
