GREEN POWER PLAYERS 2022 THE LIST Australia’s sustainable future needs vision, political will, corporate leadership and huge financial THE LIST investment. The technology race is on, and the stakes are high. No guts, no green glory. Here are the 100 people and groups who are leading the way for our nation, from the trailblazers who’ve been advocating for climate action for decades to the behind-the-scenes dealmakers funding new infrastructure and the scientists and entrepreneurs inventing new paths to a greener future. Photographed by Jonathan Cami AGRICULTURE Dean Yibarbuk — DEPUTY CHAIR, KARRKAD KANJDJI TRUST Central Arnhem Land-born Dean Yibarbuk has been a driving force in indigenous land management and conservation in northern Australia for more than 35 years. He helped establish the Wardekken Land Management group, which unites indigenous ranger groups and land-management practices, providing employment and securing income for indigenous people. He is indigenous chair of the Karrkad Kanjdji Trust, which works with indigenous ranger groups in West and Central Arnhem Land to address conservation issues, with the support of philanthropists. Yibarbuk is also a board member of the Indigenous Carbon Industry Network, an independent indigenous-led not-for-profit that brings together organisations across northern Australia developing and delivering carbon projects through traditional savanna fire management.
Neil Waina — HEAD UUNGUU RANGER As head Uunguu ranger, Neil Waina manages the Right Way Fire program in Wunambal Gaambera country in the far north Kimberley. Rangers and young traditional owners collaborate to burn their country according to traditional principles and timelines, but using modern technology. “Our ancestors used right-way fire from generation to generation”, says Waina. “They passed their knowledge to us and we will pass it down to the next generation.” The rangers also manage weeds and feral animals, monitor wildlife and care for cultural sites.
Geoff Murrell — CEO, PACKHORSE Geoff Murrell started his professional career as a jackeroo. He now leads Packhorse, a rural investment business which owns and manages agricultural property for beef farming using the principles of regenerative agriculture, which seeks to increase biodiversity and enrich the soil over time. Packhorse is currently seeking investment for Packhorse Pastoral Co, an entirely new entity with plans to create a two million-hectare land bank for cattle grazing and soil carbon sequestration.
Nigel Sharp — CEO, TIVERTON AGRICULTURE IMPACT FUND Nigel Sharp describes himself as a "biodiversity impact investor, conservationist and environmental business innovator”. He leads the Tiverton Agriculture Impact Fund, which invests based on an overall strategy of combining regenerative agriculture with biodiversity solutions and natural capital. The fund holds several properties for production of food including olives, stone fruit, grapes and seasonal crops and jointly owns with The Nature Conservancy Australian more than 33,765 hectares of Murray-Darling Basin land including the Great Cumbung Swamp, which is managed both for conservation and sustainable agriculture.
Joseph Morrison — GROUP CEO, INDIGENOUS LAND AND SEA CORPORATION Joseph Morrison's experience is in advocacy, policy, research and management of indigenous resources. He was the founding CEO of the North Australian Indigenous Land and Sea Management Alliance Ltd and now serves as group CEO of the Australian government's Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation, which aims to help Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people manage their land, water and related rights to realise economic, social, cultural and environmental benefits. He is also a director of the Reef and Rainforest Research Centre, a not-for-profit consortium of research providers, industry and community organisations based in Cairns.
Jason Strong — MANAGING DIRECTOR, MEAT AND LIVESTOCK AUSTRALIA Strong sees sustainability as the multi-billion-dollar red-meat industry's best business case for success and oversees the industry body's strategic plan for 2025. Challenges include the role of livestock in greenhouse gas emissions, and Strong is leading Meat and Livestock Australia's goal of the local industry becoming carbon neutral by 2030 while also maintaining animal numbers, through a combination of emissions reduction and carbon storage.
Sam Elsom — CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, SEA FOREST Elsom may have changed course from his previous career in eco-conscious fashion, but he continues to prioritise sustainability. He is the CEO of Sea Forest, which is the first business in the world to cultivate asparagopsis, a red seaweed native to Australia, at commercial scale. The fast-growing plant, produced at sea and on land in south-western Tasmania, absorbs carbon dioxide through photosynthesis, but can also be used as a food supplement which significantly reduces the methane produced and emitted by ruminant livestock including cattle and sheep.
Anika Molesworth — DEPUTY CHAIR, FARMERS FOR CLIMATE ACTION Anika Molesworth was 12 when her family moved from Melbourne to a farm in Far West New South Wales. She developed a strong connection to the land and also, after living through the millennium drought, a passion for conservation and sustainable farming. In 2015 she helped establish Farmers for Climate Action, which now represents more than 6000 Australian farmers. Her platform, Climate Wise Agriculture, connects farmers and land managers to researchers. Her 2021 book, Our Sunburnt Country, examines our food system through the lens of climate change.
CARBON Skye Glenday — CO-CHIEF EXECUTIVE, CLIMATE FRIENDLY The carbon farming project developer has a big goal: generating 100 million tonnes of carbon abatement by 2025. With interest surging in Australia’s carbon market, Climate Friendly secured backing from Australian private equity firm Adamantem Capital in 2021 as it looks to boost landowners moving into the carbon farming business. Climate Friendly takes an unusual approach with co-CEOs in Glenday and Josh Harris, previously chief operating officer. Harris focuses on demand from corporates targeting net-zero while Glenday is on the supply side, concentrating on partnerships with farmers and foresters, government and industry to develop new carbon-farming methods and new tech to cut deal costs.
James Schultz — CEO, GREENCOLLAR Australia’s biggest carbon project developer has considerable firepower with the backing of two big-name investors: private equity giant KKR and Canada’s Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan which combined now own 65 per cent of the firm. CEO Schulz, who co-founded the company more than a decade ago, also owns a 10 per cent stake and is focused on its bread and butter-generating carbon credit projects while also pushing into new areas including boosting water quality at the Great Barrier Reef and introducing both plastics credits and developing nature-positive markets. GreenCollar has been busy scooping up smaller carbon-trading businesses and is also expanding geographically into plastic recovery projects in West Africa and forest protection in Southeast Asia.
Ben Stuart — CHIEF COMMERCIAL OFFICER, XPANSIV/CBL MARKETS Stuart co-founded the Sydney-based CBL Markets in 2009, with the firm one of the world’s biggest exchanges for spot market trading of physical carbon offsets. CBL then merged with San Francisco’s Xpansiv in 2019, with the company counting a swag of high-profile backers including Macquarie, BP and Occidental. Carbon-credit volumes surged past 100 million tonnes in 2021 with strong demand as a growing number of big businesses sign up to net-zero emission goals. Customers include corporates, financial institutions, offset project developers and fund managers with talk simmering last year of a local Australian listing which could hand the company a $500 million valuation.
Rich Gilmore — CEO, CARBON GROWTH PARTNERS Gilmore founded Carbon Growth Partners (CGP) to invest in carbon credits — a tradable unit representing the reduction or removal of one tonne of carbon dioxide equivalent from the atmosphere. The Carbon Growth Opportunities Fund set an initial target of $US10 million ($13.92 million) and surpassed $US50 million apiece across two separate rounds, with the most recent raise conducted before the COP26 summit in Glasgow, capitalising on surging interest in the sector. CGP now has more than $200 million under management. Gilmore previously worked for the Nature Conservancy, a global non-profit organisation, and expects carbon price growth to continue with abundant, low-cost energy credits being phased out and nature-based credits difficult to create.
John Connor — CEO, CARBON MARKET INSTITUTE Connor’s background spanning the Australian Conservation Foundation, The Climate Institute and assisting the COP23 Presidency Secretariat has seen him lift the stature of the CMI as the peak body straddling business and climate action in Australia. The institute — whose members include big investors across energy, banking and heavy industry — supports market-based solutions to climate including Australian carbon credit units (ACCU) and is backing a move for greater transparency on companies’ performance against their emissions reduction and renewable energy targets. With a threefold increase in the ACCU spot price in 2021 and a 76 per cent lift in the number of ACCUs transacted in the secondary market, Connor expects another strong year ahead as corporate interest continues to gather pace.
Rowan Foley — CEO, ABORIGINAL CARBON FOUNDATION The Alice Springs-based Foley is CEO of the Aboriginal Carbon Foundation (AbCF), which connects Aboriginal communities who supply carbon credits with companies looking to offset their carbon pollution, along with training for indigenous rangers. Foley started his career working as a ranger at Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park and was the first land management officer at the Kimberley Land Council, where he negotiated Western Australia’s first Indigenous Protected Area at Paruku (Lake Gregory). AbCF — the only indigenous organisation in Australia to provide carbon credits with third party-verified environmental, social and cultural benefits — recently renewed a deal with banking giant CBA, committing to purchasing carbon credits and supporting its savanna-burning carbon farming project.
Matthew Warnken — FOUNDER, AGRIPROVE, CORPORATE CARBON Warnken wears two hats as founder of Corporate Carbon, a company that started its life as an advisory firm in 2010 and has since grown to developing and owning emissions reduction projects. He’s also a founder and managing director of soil carbon operator AgriProve, spun out of Corporate Carbon in 2018 and with some 135 projects registered with the Clean Energy Regulator and a further 80 waiting for approval. Warnken was the head delegate for the Business Council for Sustainable Development Australia at Glasgow’s COP26 summit and AgriProve in November signed a partnership with GreenCollar, boosting its soil carbon reach and offering more scope for farmers to gain access to carbon markets.
FINANCE Mike & Annie Cannon-Brookes — FOUNDERS, GROK VENTURES Mike Cannon-Brookes might be best known for his day job as co-founder of tech giant Atlassian, but the billionaire has become a major figure in climate and renewable energy circles. A Twitter bet with Tesla boss Elon Musk in 2017 helped spark the world’s biggest battery in South Australia. And through his private investment company Grok Ventures, Mike and his wife Annie have backed a raft of firms including solar fintech Brighte, carbon firm Soil Carbon Co, renewable firm Drift and the $30 billion solar power export project, Sun Cable. Not to mention maggot waste innovator Goterra. The couple committed $1.5 billion of their fortune to climate change philanthropy, called on corporate Australia to do the same and vowed to push Canberra to hike its ambition in cutting emissions.
Katherine McConnell — FOUNDER AND CEO, BRIGHTE After a successful career at Macquarie Group, Katherine McConnell saw an opportunity to turbocharge Australia’s solar revolution. Brighte was born in 2015 with the aim of providing a targeted buy-now, pay-later finance provider for green energy. Six years on and the startup has approved $1 billion in finance with 100,000 households taking up funding from 1800 solar and home-improvement businesses. Now the financier, backed by Mike Cannon-Brookes's private investment firm, plans to become a standalone electricity retailer and manage Australian homes’ energy needs as part of a larger retail push. With Atlassian co-founder Scott Farquhar another big-name investor and Canva billionaire and co-founder Cameron Adams also a shareholder, an eventual sharemarket float could be on the cards although any IPO is expected to be several years away.
Piers Grove — CO-FOUNDER AND CHAIR, ENERGYLAB Since its inception in 2017, EnergyLab has acted as an accelerator for renewable energy startups with a focus on bringing clean tech products to market. Grove cofounded the company, which is now headquartered at Sydney’s University of Technology, and has helped develop an impressive list of innovators given up to 24 months to bring their products to market, rather than the three-month norm for many accelerator schemes. Four new businesses receive investment every six months, with graduates including thermal energy storage firm MGA Thermal, renewable software business Evergen and cloud energy operator Wattwatchers. Grove wears many hats: he is also a co-founder of circular economy accelerator Boomerang Labs, doubles as a media entrepreneur (he publishes The Betoota Advocate) and chairs Gun Control Australia.
Ally Bonakdar — GLOBAL HEAD, INFRASTRUCTURE, ENERGY AND UTILITIES, SPECIALISED FINANCE, NAB While NAB has been among the biggest lenders to fossil fuel projects, the big four bank is also the largest financier of renewable energy projects in Australia, accounting for more than 70 per cent of its total lending to energy generation. NAB has now lent $11.5 billion to fund 150 clean energy developments worldwide with an eye on hydrogen as a big opportunity for its ambitions. Bonakdar, now global head of infrastructure, energy and utilities, has helped drive a string of high-profile deals across wind and solar farms including Neoen’s Kaban Green Power Hub in Far North Queensland and Australia’s largest wind project, Stockyard Hill. The bank is also backing emerging hydrogen deals, in the expectation funding to the Newcastle coal port will eventually drive a pivot to the emerging fuel source.
Roger Lloyd — CEO, PALISADE INVESTMENT PARTNERS Infrastructure manager Palisade emerged as a significant player among financiers after launching its $1 billion renewable energy fund in 2016, offering exposure to four wind farms and one solar asset, and backed to the tune of $75 million by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. Five years on and the fund has beaten its one-gigawatt target after buying a 50 per cent stake in Victoria’s Macarthur Wind Farm, one of our biggest renewable energy generators. CEO Lloyd is also pumping money into new boutique investment arm, Palisade Impact, which targets investments in the booming environmental, social and governance space.
Ian Learmonth — CEO, CLEAN ENERGY FINANCE CORPORATION The Australian government’s green bank has invested nearly $10 billion across hundreds of energy generation, cleantech and agriculture projects since its inception in 2012, spanning direct investment, asset finance and debt markets. Under Learmonth, CEO since 2017, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation continues to adapt, moving away from large-scale solar and wind into grid transmission, recycling and green hydrogen alongside pumped storage and batteries. The government’s Low Emissions Technology Commercialisation Fund sets it on a new path, administering $500 million of seed capital with a focus on carbon capture and storage, and methane-reducing livestock feed. The fund will make venture capital investments — not loans or grants — in Australian startups and businesses.
Katharine Tapley — HEAD OF SUSTAINABLE FINANCE, ANZ Tapley’s team at ANZ oversees a plan for $50 billion in sustainable funding by 2025 to help its customers lower carbon emissions and has already lent more than $22 billion to hit its target. Tapley also has oversight of its green bond program in conjunction with Treasury and was involved in five per cent of global sustainable finance deals in the past 12 months. All that adds up to a big commitment but the next challenge for ANZ is to ensure its fossil fuel customers make the leap to emerging markets such as hydrogen and lithium amid criticism it continues to prop up significant gas and mining activity.
Lachlan Creswell — HEAD OF GREEN INVESTMENT GROUP, MACQUARIE Renewables may be relatively modest compared with the financial giant’s infrastructure investments, but Macquarie CEO Shemara Wikramanayake has big ambitions to turbocharge its green footprint. With 300 global renewable energy projects already under its belt, the homegrown investor is still backing solar and wind projects but also taking positions in green hydrogen and backing the startup space. Cresswell leads Macquarie’s green arm in Australia under the Green Investment Group (GIG) imprint, partnering with developers to bring on new generation, backed by green bonds. GIG is now in 25 markets around the world and has committed or arranged more than $16 billion in investments since it was acquired it from the British government in 2017.
Kyle Mangini — GLOBAL HEAD OF INFRASTRUCTURE, IFM INVESTORS IFM Investors, owned by 27 industry superannuation funds, is best known for ownership of some of our most prized infrastructure assets, but is also developing a significant international renewables footprint. It teamed up with commodities powerhouse Trafigura to form Nala Renewables with a goal of investing $2.8 billion in clean energy projects across five years. IFM also made a blockbuster $8 billion cash offer for a stake in Spanish power and renewable operator Naturgy Energy, which plans to double its clean energy capacity in Australia. As IFM’s global head of infrastructure, Mangini oversees plans for a 40 per cent emissions cut by 2030 as part of its efforts to meet net-zero goals.
Justin Punch — CO-FOUNDER, ASSEMBLY CLIMATE CAPITAL Punch co-founded Assembly Climate Capital with Peter Gold after working together at private equity group Archer Capital and he also chairs the Australian Renewable Energy Agency. Assembly’s mandate is to invest in “Series B and C” capital, referring to later stage investment after seed and initial funding is secured and projects are ready to roll out. Assembly — sometimes in tandem with family offices — has already invested in Australia’s first fossil-free super fund Future Super, seaweed cultivator Sea Forest, carbon-offset firm Tasman Environmental, Dutch food-tech company Mosa Meat and lithium hopeful Vulcan Energy. Its ethos is “patient urgency” — long-term investments paired with a time-critical focus on accelerating climate impact.
Tom Laidlaw — MANAGING DIRECTOR, INFRASTRUCTURE CAPITAL GROUP Australian fund manager Infrastructure Capital Group has growing clout in renewables after buying Meridian Energy’s Australian wind, hydro and development assets, adding to its existing string of wind farms in Victoria and South Australia. It also owns a 75 per cent stake in the Australian Renewable Energy Trust, a joint venture between ENGIE and Mitsui which is targeting plans to develop a 2500-megawatt pipeline of clean energy projects. Under Laidlaw, the firm has focused on mid-scale deals and a heavy involvement in most recent auctions and buyouts to have come to market with an eye on eventual exits for balancing its portfolio.
Alistair Craib — PARTNER, ICA PARTNERS Boutique adviser ICA Partners has been involved in some of Australia’s landmark deals in recent years across mergers and acquisitions, debt and equity transactions, capital raising and power purchase agreements and in doing so giving Macquarie Capital a ride for its money in the renewable space. Craib, an ex-UBS executive, has helped drive activity since 2013 with significant deals including Bright Energy Investments, advice to Spark on its TransGrid investment along with work on Ratch, Neoen and Lightsource BP. Most recently, ICA won the mandate to sell one of Australia’s largest wind farms, Macarthur. Other deals on the corporate side include Sydney Airport on its energy procurement strategy.
HYDROGEN Andrew Forrest — CHAIRMAN, FORTESCUE FUTURE INDUSTRIES The iron ore billionaire is ploughing ahead with an ambitious plan to build a global energy giant capable of producing 15 million tonnes of green hydrogen a year by 2030. Forrest’s Fortescue Future Industries (FFI) has looked at potential renewable energy projects capable of creating more than 50 times the capacity of Australia’s national energy market. It must now work through a dizzying array of feasibility studies, identifying funding opportunities and developing its own technology to make green hydrogen a commercial reality. Forrest says FFI will create the projects, sell them to infrastructure investors and asset managers, with returns to fund managers underpinned by an agreement that FFI will buy the power they generate.
Brendan Hammond — HEAD OF AUSTRALIA, INTERCONTINENTAL ENERGY InterContinental has chosen Western Australia, alongside Saudi Arabia and Oman, as part of its plans to become one of the world’s biggest producers of green hydrogen. The Hong Kong-based renewable energy project developer can also call on extra financial firepower after receiving a strategic equity investment from Singapore sovereign wealth fund giant, GIC. InterContinental’s international portfolio consists of 200 gigawatts of onshore wind and solar capacity, enabling production of 14 million tonnes a year of green hydrogen or 80 million tonnes annually of green ammonia. Hammond, who chairs the WA Regional Development Trust and the Pilbara Development Commission, has had oversight of its Asian Renewable Energy Hub and is chairman of the $100 billion Western Green Energy Hub, both giant projects which could start delivering supplies later this decade.
Tim Rogers – GENERAL MANAGER, TRAFIGURA Commodity trading giant Trafigura has emerged as a powerful player in Australia’s growing list of green hydrogen projects. It was named among companies in the Hunter Hydrogen Network which aims to use solar and wind generation to feed a “green” hydrogen pipeline supplying manufacturing plants with zero emissions. Hydrogen and ammonia would be exported from Newcastle using existing or new port infrastructure. Trafigura is also planning a $750 million green hydrogen plant at Port Pirie, part of a push to cut costs and improve the competitiveness of its Hobart and Port Pirie smelters, and underscoring a move by big industry players to expand in the renewable energy sector.
Frank Calabria – CEO, ORIGIN ENERGY While Origin has a hefty coal and gas footprint, the power giant is also aggressively pushing into green hydrogen as a new source of domestic and export growth. From Tasmania’s Bell Bay, it aims to make 420,000 tonnes per year of zero-emissions ammonia for overseas buyers. It is also part of a green hydrogen demonstration plant with Jemena in western Sydney and has plans to build a hydrogen export plant in Townsville with Japan’s Kawasaki Heavy Industries. The 300-megawatt electrolyser will produce 36,000 tonnes of liquid hydrogen a year for both export and domestic supply. Calabria has also signed a deal with the world’s biggest liquified natural gas carrier, Mitsui O.S.K. Lines, to work on developing the supply chain for export-scale green ammonia from Australia by 2026.
Rob Wheals — CEO AND MANAGING DIRECTOR, APA GROUP APA owns 15,000 kilometres of gas pipelines across Australia and delivers half the nation’s gas along with stakes in storage facilities, power stations and wind and solar farms. That sets it up to play a vital part in rolling out hydrogen across the gas network. APA has applied to test Victoria’s gas transmission network for blending hydrogen, and has an existing pilot project in Western Australia for the proposed conversion of a pipeline into our first 100 per cent hydrogen-ready transmission infrastructure. At a project level, APA is also part of NSW’s Hunter Hydrogen Network and joins Australian and Japanese partners in a plan to create Queensland’s biggest green hydrogen project in Gladstone.
IMPACT Simon Holmes à Court — CONVENOR, CLIMATE 200 Climate 200 was set up prior to the 2019 federal election by a group of concerned Australians worried “climate-science denial and vested interests” were delaying meaningful action on environment. The group is convened by Holmes à Court, a climate activist, clean-energy investor and son of billionaire businessman Robert Holmes à Court. Its ambition is to back up to 15 candidates at the next federal election with more than 6000 donors ready to begin funding independents in eight Liberal heartland seats in New South Wales and Victoria. The Victorian, a director of the Smart Energy Council, says Climate 200 is on track to raise up to $20 million ahead of polling day, marking a significant disruption to the established political order.
Anna Skarbek – CEO, CLIMATEWORKS AUSTRALIA ClimateWorks, founded by Victoria’s Monash University and the Myer Foundation, is focused on developing the low carbon economy and convenes the Australian Industry Energy Transition Initiative in partnership with innovation group Climate-KIC. With net-zero by 2050 now almost a default position for many Australian businesses, ClimateWorks aims to cut emissions in transport, industry and energy including a “momentum tracker” that holds companies’ pledges to account. Skarbek herself is a former banker and green policy adviser and has pushed for more ambitious emission reduction targets to ensure states and the nation itself remain on track to hit mid-century goals.
Tennant Reed — PRINCIPAL NATIONAL ADVISER PUBLIC POLICY, AI GROUP Ai Group’s “climate guy” Reed calls himself a Melbourne-based policy wonk and “the guy with the glasses who does all the electricity”. But it’s his reach across both climate and energy along with manufacturing and innovation that gives him an influential position helping shape the public debate and offering up solutions to cut through a mass of policy and regulatory complexity. Reed is also a facilitator of the Australian Climate Roundtable, created in 2014, combining businesses, farmers and investors to avert the impacts of climate change. The employer group’s focus is navigating a path that delivers on Australia’s technology promise and finds credible pathways to netzero, a pledge that still requires heavy lifting across many of Ai Group’s members.
Rebecca Mikula-Wright — CEO, INVESTOR GROUP ON CLIMATE CHANGE With IGCC members owning $2 trillion in funds under management in Australasia and $20 trillion globally, Mikula-Wright has considerable firepower to push companies into stronger action on climate change. The group has some of the world’s biggest asset managers on board and is chaired in Australia by Cbus’s Stephen Dunne. Mikula-Wright took on the CEO role in July alongside a broader Asia-focused role she has held with the same group since 2016. The IGCC's focus now is on agitating for a new breed of non-executive directors able to adeptly deal with climate pressures and pushing for mandatory climate reporting to be included in best corporate governance practice.
Imogen Zethoven — ENVIRONMENTAL CAMPAIGNER, BLUE OCEAN CONSULTING Zethoven has been pushing to protect the Great Barrier Reef for decades, including a campaign that started in the early 2000s to establish the world's largest network of protected no-fishing zones in the marine park. The environmentalist was also arguing for coal to be phased out of the power system as far back as two decades ago, calling for substantial cuts to use of fossil fuels to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. More recently, Zethoven has worked as a world heritage consultant to the Australian Marine Conservation Society, where a big focus is the effort to have the reef’s health status classified as “in danger”, a move resisted by the federal government.
Julien Vincent — EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MARKET FORCES Vincent founded Market Forces in 2013 to hold banks and superannuation funds to account, campaigning to ensure their money is used to protect rather than damage the environment. Market Forces, which is an arm of environmental group Friends of the Earth, has been dubbed an eco-socialist network which in recent years has focused on using shareholder resolutions to pile pressure on big business including some of Australia’s worst polluters. Big banks in particular have caved to cut funding to the coal industry and the group now regularly gets face time with some of the nation’s most powerful boards, underscoring its success forcing change among corporate Australia.
Brynn O’Brien — EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AUSTRALASIAN CENTRE FOR CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY “Every tonne of carbon counts. Every project, every pipeline, every drill site. Every tenth of a degree matters. So get to work.” O’Brien describes herself as a wrangler of companies and the ACCR’s brand of shareholder advocacy has gained considerable traction. It concentrates on targeted shareholder resolutions with a focus on so-called “greenwashing” among big business, and pushing companies for greater disclosure and ambition on climate. While not all of its campaigns are successful, the ACCR gained extra clout after partnering with British hedge fund billionaire and philanthropist Chris Hohn, founder of the $US30 billion The Children’s Investment Fund Management, to take some of Australia’s big fossil polluters to task over transparency on climate reporting.
David Ritter — CEO, GREENPEACE AUSTRALIA PACIFIC Ritter described a campaign against Adani’s Carmichael coal mine in Queensland as a fight against big polluters and a chance to reclaim Australia’s democracy. Years earlier Greenpeace called it a “ticking carbon timebomb” and threw its support behind the influential Stop Adani campaign. While the mine has proceeded on a slimmed-down scale, the battle garnered considerable community support and increased public awareness of climate threats. Ritter, a former corporate lawyer turned activist and author, has been in charge since 2012 and can point to a big win in the Great Australian Bight over oil drilling and a high-stakes copyright battle with AGL Energy as some proof that its direct-action approach still delivers results.
Kelly O'Shanassy — CEO, AUSTRALIAN CONSERVATION FOUNDATION The Australian Conservation Foundation, funded by community donations, has plenty on its to-do list: solving the climate crisis, standing up for nature, redesigning the economy and fixing Australia’s democracy. It claims wins in recent years organising the world's biggest climate march and seeding the concept for the federal government’s green bank: the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation. O’Shanassy, after experience leading Environment Victoria, has focused on the grassroots with a pick up in community engagement, as well as pushing for a greater take-up of electric vehicles and for the Morrison government to pursue stronger net-zero targets by 2030.
Amelia Telford — NATIONAL DIRECTOR, SEED \Seed describes itself as Australia’s first indigenous youth climate network, set up in 2014 as an arm of the Australian Youth Climate Coalition with a goal of tackling the climate crisis. It has since struck out to become its own organisation with campaigns including gas fracking, coal mining and stronger cultural heritage protections. Seed opposed projects including Santos’s Narrabri coal seam gas field in NSW and the Beetaloo Basin fossil fuel development in the Northern Territory. Telford, a Bundjalung woman from the NSW North Coast, is a past winner of the Australian Geographic Society's Young Conservationist of the Year, and wants to continue building a platform for young indigenous people to make their voices heard.
Elaine Johnson — DIRECTOR, SYSTEMIC CHANGE PROGRAM, ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENDERS OFFICE Johnson cites the rejection of the Rocky Hill coking coal mine planned for the Hunter Valley in New South Wales as the case that changed her: the state’s Land and Environment Court noted the “dire consequences” of the coal project on global pollution levels. For the Environmental Defenders Office (EDO), which ran the case for the local community of Gloucester, it marked a pivotal moment fighting the impact of climate change on the ground in Australia. The EDO also successfully challenged fossil fuel grants in the Northern Territory’s Beetaloo Basin in December 2021, a thorn in the side of the federal government, although exploration in the contentious gas basin is still proceeding regardless. Both the Great Barrier Reef and Woodside’s Scarborough, Western Australia gas project are also among targets for this important legal force holding companies and politicians to account.
Kane Thornton — CHIEF EXECUTIVE, CLEAN ENERGY COUNCIL After more than a decade with the Clean Energy Council, Thornton has had front-row seats to the nation’s at-times volatile renewable energy industry. By many measures, Australia is a world leader, with three million rooftop solar systems installed since 2000 and a fast-moving transition away from coal now reinventing the power grid. Yet in other respects it appears a laggard: Thornton has been among the critics of a lacklustre approach to policies incentivising the roll out of electric vehicles while also pushing for simpler regulatory reforms and accelerating the development of critical infrastructure needed to deliver clean energy across the electricity system.
Geoff Summerhayes — CHAIR, BEYOND ZERO EMISSIONS Summerhayes joined Beyond Zero Emissions (BZE) as chairman in December, a high-profile appointment for the climate think tank led by Heidi Lee. Summerhayes was one of the first regulators to warn financiers of climate risks. He grabbed headlines in 2019 when, as a board member of the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, he declared it was investigating the country’s biggest financial groups over their climate change mitigation strategies. Since the end of Summerhayes's five-year term at APRA, he has joined climate change firm Pollination as an adviser and will now help BZE on its vision including the Million Jobs Plan and repowering manufacturing through industrial precincts.
INNOVATION Rose Amal AC — SCIENTIA PROFESSOR CHEMICAL ENGINEERING, ARC LAUREATE FELLOW, UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES Scientia professor Rose Amal leads the particles and catalysis research laboratory with the school of chemical engineering at the University of New South Wales (UNSW). She is currently focused on designing nanomaterials for solar and chemical energy conversion applications and engineering systems for solar-induced processes, using the sun’s energy as a clean fuel source. In 2021, Professor Amal led and co-authored a pre-feasibility study and roadmap for the Office of NSW Chief Scientist & Engineer on the opportunities to establish Power to X (P2X) production in NSW, in which renewable energy and sustainable materials would be converted into power fuels and clean chemicals such as green hydrogen. If developed, a P2X industry would accelerate the hydrogen economy and assist with the state's net-zero goals.
Thomas Maschmeyer — PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY, UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY; FOUNDER, GELION TECHNOLOGIES; CO-FOUNDER, LICELLA HOLDINGS The University of Sydney professor of chemistry also demonstrates the potential for commercialisation of university research: Maschmeyer is a founder of battery technology company Gelion Technologies, a university spin-off established in 2015 and listed on the London Stock Exchange AIM market in 2021. He is also co-founder of Licella Holdings, another spin-off which uses the CAT-HTR technology he developed to offer a low emissions recycling solution for biomass, and enable a circular economy for previously non-recyclable plastics. Maschmeyer is founding director of the laboratory of advanced catalysis for sustainability within Sydney University’s school of chemistry and was also founding director of the Australian Institute of Nanoscale Science and Technology (Sydney Nano).
Jess Melbourne-Thomas — MARINE, ANTARCTIC AND CLIMATE CHANGE SCIENTIST, OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE, CSIRO With a background in ecosystem science and modelling, 2020 Tasmanian Australian of the Year Dr Jess Melbourne-Thomas is a transdisciplinary researcher and knowledge broker for the CSIRO's Oceans and Atmosphere in Hobart. Melbourne-Thomas was previously a research scientist at the Australian Antarctic Program and project leader at the Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre. Her focus now is on bridging the gap between scientific research and public policy in order to ensure science plays a stronger role in government decision-making. She was a lead author for the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on the Oceans and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (2019).
Saul Griffith — FOUNDER, REWIRING AUSTRALIA Dr Griffith is an engineer, an inventor, an entrepreneur … and an optimist. He is co-author of the book Rewiring America, and an associated not-for-profit, and in 2021 launched Rewiring Australia with the same aim: to advocate for mass electrification. Griffith believes Australia can lead the world in the decarbonisation of households — particularly our cars and heating/cooling systems — by utilisation of rooftop solar and battery backups, while also saving consumers money.
Matthew England — SCIENTIA PROFESSOR OF OCEAN AND CLIMATE DYNAMICS, UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES In a recent Tweet, climate scientist Professor Matthew England pointed to a scientific paper showing that what humans are doing now could affect climate for the next half a million years. His expertise is in oceanography, and the effect of ocean circulation on the regional and global climate, and he is an authority on the modelling of the Southern Ocean. England is a co-founder of and part of the academic team at UNSW's Climate Change Research Centre; he is also an advocate for greater political action on emissions reduction, and believes Glasgow's COP26 commitments didn't go far enough.
Josep (Pep) Canadell — CHIEF RESEARCH SCIENTIST, CSIRO CLIMATE SCIENCE CENTRE; EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GLOBAL CARBON PROJECT As executive director of the Global Carbon Project, Dr Canadell leads the efforts to coordinate the work of the global scientific community in creating a research framework and knowledge base to help support policy and action to reduce greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. His role as chief research scientist in the CSIRO Climate Science Centre sees him focus on developing Australian, regional and global carbon budgets to guide governments on the emission levels needed to reach targets. Canadell was recently ranked No.8 on Reuters’ aptly named Hot List of global climate scientists, the top Australian-based inclusion on the list.
Andrew Blakers — PROFESSOR OF ENGINEERING, AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY Professor Andrew Blakers was part of the University of New South Wales research team with Martin Green that in 1989 reported the creation of silicon solar cells with a then record efficiency by using a passive emitter and rear cell (PERC) structure. Rapid adoption of the PERC technology took some time but it is now used widely across the world; according to Blakers, approximately $50 billion worth of PERC modules have been sold to date. Blakers is now a professor of engineering at the Australian National University and part of ANU’s 100% Renewable Energy group, researching and developing myriad scenarios to reduce emissions and move Australia efficiently towards carbon neutrality.
POLITICS/POLICY Angus Taylor — MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY, ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION Since his appointment in 2018, Taylor has proved an effective if divisive minister for both the clean energy industry and the nation’s climate change ambitions. While Australia easily beat its renewable energy target in 2020, Taylor was cautious about the high penetration of solar and wind, wanting a mix of storage and fossil fuels to back up the intermittent supply sources. While renewable investment has continued, the government has switched focus to low emissions technology with plans to fund $21 billion to drive $120 billion of investment by 2030. While Australia eventually agreed to a net-zero emissions by 2050 target prior to Glasgow, it’s showing no signs of budging on its 2030 goals. Taylor is banking on cheaper renewables, the growth of carbon markets and rapid changes in technology to deliver on Australia’s potential.
Jo Evans — DEPUTY SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY, AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT Evans has been at the forefront of the federal government’s strategies on climate change and renewables with oversight of cutting pollution, low emissions technology and a string of national bodies including the Clean Energy Regulator and the Australian Renewable Energy Agency. Despite criticism that Australia’s 26-28 per cent emissions reduction level by 2030 remains too modest, the government has pinned its hopes on its $3.5 billion Climate Solutions Package and a $1 billion fund to invest in companies that develop low emissions technology. It also eventually agreed to a net-zero by 2050 target with much of the heavy lifting done through the adoption of new technologies; a move that drew scepticism from some quarters.
Ben Oquist — EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE AUSTRALIA INSTITUTE The Australia Institute’s executive director attended the COP26 conference where he was dismissive of the nation’s attempts to balance emissions cuts with decades of fossil fuel growth ahead. The independent think tank has been among the most vocal in pushing for Australia to dramatically lift its 2030 emissions target. “Australia is not getting off fossil fuels, it’s getting into fossil fuels more and that’s putting Australia on the back foot,” Oquist said from Glasgow. The institute is now pushing for stronger commitments to be made ahead of COP27, a move which may gain traction given the number of Australian states forging ahead with more ambitious targets of their own.
David Parker — CHAIR, CLEAN ENERGY REGULATOR Under Parker’s leadership, the regulator’s role has evolved from managing the Renewable Energy Target and Emissions Reduction Fund through to delivering on schemes to manage Australia’s move to net-zero emissions. It’s also seeking to improve transparency around corporate emissions pledges, develop supply chain carbon accounting and plans to launch the Australian Carbon Exchange by 2023, reflecting a desire for greater transparency in the booming carbon credit market as corporates look to offset their emissions. With little let-up in rooftop solar growth, the Clean Energy Regulator also plays a key role in monitoring small-scale solar and oversight of installation nationally.
Dan Van Holst Pellekaan — SOUTH AUSTRALIAN ENERGY MINISTER South Australia’s renewable energy ambition has picked up pace under the state’s Liberal government. With about two-thirds of its power generation now derived from renewables, it plans to slash emissions in half by 2030 and become a major exporter of green energy through solar, wind and green hydrogen. Van Holst Pellekaan has already notched up a number of firsts including 100 per cent instant renewable penetration for an hour and a plan for hitting a level of renewable energy more than 500 per cent of current local grid demand by 2050. Ensuring sufficient storage and transmission capacity will be critical to meeting the state’s goals.
Grant King — CHAIR, CLIMATE CHANGE AUTHORITY After a long stint heading up major gas and coal generator Origin Energy, King has turned into an influential figure in Australian climate circles given his roles as chair of the Climate Change Authority, carbon project developer GreenCollar and developer CWP Renewables. In addition he advises on the federal government’s Technology Investment Roadmap and heads a review examining additional sources of low-cost carbon abatement. The Climate Change Authority has the job of delivering practical solutions to meet emission reduction goals along with net-zero targets and has renewed clout under King’s leadership despite criticism of his extensive fossil fuel links from his previous corporate career.
Martijn Wilder AM — FOUNDING PARTNER, POLLINATION
Wilder has worn an array of climate hats over the years including chair of the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and a founding director of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation. But it’s his work as founding partner of Pollination that is grabbing attention from corporates with its ambitious goal to become the world’s leading climate advisory and investment firm by 2026. The company already has a climate asset management division with partner HSBC and is focusing on venture capital, net-zero transition and energy infrastructure: all big themes as corporates and countries clamour to green up their climate credentials.
James Hay — CEO, ENERGY CORPORATION OF NSW NSW’s EnergyCo is set to play a pivotal role leading delivery of the state’s ambitious Renewable Energy Zones, part of a $32 billion blueprint which plans to add an extra 12 gigawatts of clean generation and two gigawatts of storage by 2030. Among Hay's tasks are fine-tuning access deals that lure private investment into the major zones against a backdrop that requires hefty investment in infrastructure to deliver supply to market. The New England zone drew interest covering more than four times the eight gigawatts of capacity on offer and EnergyCo faces a critical period ahead delivering on the NSW government’s promise to help resource-rich regions make the switch to clean energy.
Daniel Westerman — CEO AND MANAGING DIRECTOR, AUSTRALIAN ENERGY MARKET OPERATOR Westerman’s first major statement upon taking the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) helm was a pledge to be able to handle 100 per cent instant renewables penetration across Australia’s power grid by 2025. Given the myriad issues facing the system as a transition picks up pace away from coal, the goal was questioned by critics but Westerman sticks by the ambitious target to focus the mind on ensuring the right skills, reforms and policies are in place to make it a reality. It’s also predicted coal is set to be extinguished from Australia’s electricity system up to a decade earlier than planned, exiting three times faster than expected. Juggling the rapidly changing system means Westerman and AEMO face a huge few years ahead.
Sussan Ley – MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT An elderly nun and bunch of teenagers proved a big problem for Ley, who was challenged in a landmark class action over the harm caused by climate change when approving the expansion of the Whitehaven coal mine near Gunnedah in northern New South Wales. The case underscored the depth of feeling surrounding the Australian government’s lack of climate change ambition, with protection of the Great Barrier Reef also a flashpoint in the ongoing debate. Ley continues to back the government’s technology-led approach to emissions reduction, although the actual responsibility for policies governing the issue sit with Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor. In the meantime, Ley has approved several more coal mine expansions, keeping her on a warpath with environmentalists.
Lily D'Ambrosio — VICTORIAN ENERGY, ENVIRONMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE MINISTER, SOLAR HOMES MINISTER D’Ambrosio has been a long-term fixture in green power, having held the post of Victorian Energy Minister since 2014 and in recent years lifting the government’s clean ambitions with an increased target of 50 per cent renewable energy by 2030. The state appears well on its way, with renewables accounting for 32.4 per cent of demand in 2021, easily outstripping both New South Wales and Queensland. It needs more than five gigawatts of large-scale renewable generation to hit the target and is also adding big battery projects to lift the storage component. Still, big challenges await as it seeks to navigate a path through coal plant closures and transmission issues and ensure a smooth transition as the decade progresses.
Matt Kean — NSW ENERGY MINISTER AND TREASURER Kean seized the moment with a plan to cut emissions in half by 2030 as part of a net-zero goal to attract $37 billion of private investment by the end of the decade. The state is aiming for 12 gigawatts of new clean generation and two gigawatts of storage capacity, targeting renewable energy zones with long-term supply deals backed by the NSW government. Up to 9000 jobs have been promised, a big target as the state prepares for the exit of coal generation from the grid. It’s also charging ahead with $3 billion in subsidies for green hydrogen, with a focus on the Hunter Valley and Illawarra, two heavy industry regions ripe for projects tapping the emerging fuel source.
Darren Miller — CEO, AUSTRALIAN RENEWABLE ENERGY AGENCY The Morrison government reappointed Miller for a further three-year term through to August 2024, giving the executive a platform to boost the competitiveness of renewable energy technologies in Australia. Among the jobs for Miller and his team is slashing the cost of solar to less than $15 per megawatt hour, part of Canberra’s ultra low cost stretch goal contained within its Low Emissions Technology Statement. Ultimately, cheap solar will enable green hydrogen to be produced for under $2 a kilogram, dubbed H2 under $2, and a key focus for the Australian Renewable Energy Agency. Australia hopes a new low emissions boom in steel and ammonia will follow with the lure of a new export industry if the nation can deliver on its promise.
RENEWABLE ENERGY Shemara Wikramanayake — CEO, MACQUARIE GROUP Since taking the top job in 2018, Wikramanayake has sought to boost Macquarie’s exposure to renewables with a whopping 14 gigawatts of green energy under management or operation globally and a 30-gigawatt series of more than 300 projects in the pipeline. Locally, the banking giant is also building exposure through battery, offshore wind and clean hydrogen projects with cheap solar and wind seen as the low-cost renewable fuel powering the transition away from coal. With its Green Investment Group — the renewable energy platform bought from the UK government — now part of its powerful asset management division, the scene is set for Macquarie to turbocharge its decarbonisation push across the globe.
Geoff Dutaillis — CEO, POWERING AUSTRALIAN RENEWABLES (POWAR) PowAR has developed into one of the big hitters in Australian clean energy after buying Tilt Renewables. The deal handed PowAR an overall capacity of 1313 megawatts across seven wind and solar farms, a further two wind farms nearly complete and a 3500-megawatt pipeline of projects across wind, solar, battery storage and peaking capacity. The PowAR venture is split between AGL Energy, the Queensland government’s QIC and the Future Fund. It aims to create reliable supplies from its wind and solar farms through backup from batteries and other storage options which are able to generate electricity on demand, which Dutaillis sees as a significant point of difference from owners offering “variable” solar and wind supplies.
John Cole — CEO, EDIFY ENERGY Edify has invested $1.5 billion in six large-scale solar farms and several battery storage projects across Queensland, Victoria and New South Wales. The renewables developer has gone to market looking for buyers for its battery projects, expected to be a growth area as investment traction builds around storage technology. Edify has also grabbed a foothold in hydrogen with a deal to export the fuel through the Port of Townsville. It’s weighing up a green hydrogen production plant of up to one gigawatt, tapping behindthe-metre solar and battery storage, as Cole seeks to broaden its base into new technologies.
Paul Broad — CEO, SNOWY HYDRO The federal government-owned Snowy is ploughing ahead with a major expansion of its pumped hydro scheme, heavily backed by Malcolm Turnbull, that will boost capacity 50 per cent by 2025 and provide backup for supply by renewables. Snowy, which owns retail power companies Red Energy and Lumo Energy, sees the project as providing greater energy insurance and security of supply as the grid moves on from its coal base. Snowy has drawn criticism for developing its Hunter Valley gas plant, but the Sydney-based company stresses the need for a variety of supply sources as the electricity system continues to transition. Broad can point to strong demand for its commercial packages that combine wind and solar supplies with firm supply contracts at less than $70 per megawatt hour.
David Griffin — CEO, SUN CABLE The $30 billion Sun Cable project could supercharge Australia’s renewable export potential with plans to supply up to 15 per cent of Singapore’s electricity by 2027. The project includes the world’s largest solar farm and battery storage facility in the Northern Territory, transported by a 5000-kilometre subsea cable now approved by Indonesia for routing through its territorial waters. With backing by billionaires Andrew Forrest and Mike Cannon-Brookes, the facility has also gained major project status and support from the federal government, as well as state and territory approvals, and is seen as a litmus test for Australia's ambitions to build a major renewable export industry.
Ross Garnaut — DIRECTOR, ZEN ENERGY Zen’s brief dalliance with British industrialist Sanjeev Gupta ended in August 2020, with Zen then choosing to partner with renewables developer Sunshot Energy, part owned by Garnaut and chairman Raymond Spencer. Zen kept the retail licences and has a string of wind, solar and storage projects in the works. Garnaut has also been pushing a vision for Australia to become a renewables superpower, forging a path to 100 per cent clean energy. He’s also been critical of the nation’s emissions reduction goals but now sees an opportunity to build on its net-zero target and use hydrogen as an emerging fuel to boost the nation’s resources potential.
Ross Rolfe — CEO, IBERDROLA AUSTRALIA Iberdrola’s $893 million deal for wind and solar firm Infigen has lifted the profile of the Spanish utility, the largest wind-power producer in the world. The addition of Iberdrola to Australia’s electricity market signals a new wave of European utilities looking to muscle in on the turf of Australia’s big three integrated generator retailers, AGL Energy, Origin Energy and EnergyAustralia. Although it lost out to the Shell-ICG consortium bidding for Meridian Energy’s Australian assets, Iberdrola plans to replicate its global integrated strategy in Australia, suggesting it will be on the hunt to scoop up further clean energy assets on the market.
Brett Wickham — MANAGING DIRECTOR, ACCIONA ENERGY AUSTRALIA The Spanish renewable energy player Acciona generates about 600 megawatts of power through a string of wind farms in Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia, and solar: enough green energy to power more than 400,000 homes. Like many developers in the renewables space, it’s also forging ahead with hydrogen plans, signing a supply deal for a 600-megawatt Queensland solar farm that will help fuel a three-gigawatt green hydrogen facility in Gladstone. Wickham, in charge of its Australian business since 2017, continues to build the company’s clout locally as more corporates seek power purchase agreement deals to meet sustainability goals.
Garth Heron — HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT AUSTRALIA, NEOEN Heron has helped build one of Australia’s largest portfolios of wind, solar and battery storage with more than two gigawatts of projects either operating or under construction. Neoen is still best known for operating South Australia’s big battery, supplied by Elon Musk’s Tesla, and built in record time in 2017 after Musk reacted to a Twitter challenge from tech mogul Mike Cannon-Brookes to help fix the state’s summer blackout-induced electricity problems. More recently Neoen started up Victoria’s 300-megawatt big battery, one of the world’s largest, and part of a larger plan to develop a pipeline of more than two gigawatts of projects across the state.
Alex Hewitt — CO-FOUNDER, CWP RENEWABLES/CWP GLOBAL When it comes to thinking big, it’s hard to go past a giant $100 billion renewable energy hub producing green hydrogen and ammonia proposed for Western Australia, with the facility in line to be of the world’s biggest clean fuels projects should it proceed. The Western Green Energy Hub development is a joint venture between CWP, IntercontinentalEnergy and Mirning Green Energy Limited, and could produce up to 50 gigawatts of wind and solar power, nearly the entire capacity of Australia’s national electricity market. CWP Global was also involved in a proposed $48 billion wind and solar farm in Western Australia's Pilbara knocked back by federal Environment Minister Sussan Ley. A merger between CWP and Grassroots Renewable Energy has cemented the company as one of the largest independent renewable producers in Australia.
John Titchen — MANAGING DIRECTOR, GOLDWIND AUSTRALIA Goldwind operates Australia’s biggest wind farm, Victoria’s long delayed Stockyard Hill near Ballarat, with the 530-megawatt supply offtake contracted to Origin Energy. Getting the wind farm up to full capacity proved problematic amid cracks in the turbines and the Qatar-based Nebras Power bought a half stake in the project several years ago from Goldwind, a subsidiary of Chinese wind turbine maker Xinjiang Goldwind Science & Technology. Goldwind also owns a string of wind and solar farms dotted across Australia and Titchen is a well-known figure in the national renewables industry.
Christine Corbett — CHIEF CUSTOMER OFFICER, AGL AUSTRALIA AGL Australia is set to emerge from the breakup of its parent company with a significant foothold in renewables and a big challenge to ensure our oldest utility can navigate a swift transition away from coal power. The demerged business will own AGL‘s 20 per cent equity in the clean energy operator PowAR along with gas, hydro and battery assets and expects to source most of its supplies in a “capital light” manner via offtake deals with both PowAR and AGL’s coal-dominated Accel Energy. Corbett’s opportunity as CEO is the size of AGL Australia, which will provide electricity, gas, internet and mobile services to 30 per cent of Australian households and plans to target full carbon neutrality to chase a higher valuation as a green retailer.
SUPER Andrew Gray — DIRECTOR ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE AND STEWARDSHIP, AUSTRALIANSUPER Gray leads AustralianSuper’s engagement with major ASX companies on climate change and acts as the investor representative for Climate Action 100+, the group with almost $85 trillion in assets aggressively pushing the world’s largest greenhouse gas emitters to lift their ambition. The super fund, which manages more than $244 billion in retirement savings for its 2.5 million members, has been among industry leaders working to benchmark companies on their commitment to tackle climate change, although Gray has also said companies need to be given time to map out their carbon strategy. AustralianSuper has been reducing its position in undiversified fossil fuel producers as part of its sustainable investment approach and has committed to net-zero emissions by 2050.
Damian Graham — CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER, AWARE SUPER Graham is regarded as a leader on climate change in the superannuation industry, cutting thermal coal from Aware's equity position and boosting its mediumterm emissions reduction target to 45 per cent from its portfolio by 2030, a goal it wants to see replicated across the Australian economy. Aware, previously known as First State Super, is also looking to reduce its exposure on its $155 billion portfolio to the potential of stranded assets, an emerging risk as multi-decade fossil fuel investments fall under the spotlight. The fund has piled $1 billion into clean energy investments in recent years and has set fund-wide targets for investments in renewables and new technologies.
Debby Blakey — CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, HESTA The $68 billion industry super fund has been one of the most aggressive players on climate change, including funnelling early-stage capital to investments focused on the energy transition. Blakey, along with HESTA’s former impact head Mary Delahunty, has warned Australia risks being left behind as global capital markets pour huge money into net-zero investment opportunities. Blakey was also a fierce critic of mining giant Rio Tinto after its destruction of 46,000-year-old heritage sites at West Australia’s Juukan Gorge. HESTA was the first major Australian superannuation fund to commit to cutting carbon across its investment portfolio to net-zero by 2050 with a 33 per cent reduction set for 2030.
TECHNOLOGY David Hu and Vince Allen — FOUNDERS, SUNDRIVE Sundrive was a just PhD project in a garage when founded by David Hu and Vince Allen in 2015. Since then, it has presided over significant technological leaps, including setting a new world efficiency record for a commercial silicon solar cell in September last year. In December the company announced it had successfully fabricated its first full-sized panel, taking a further step towards wider commercialisation. A key plank in their technology is the use of copper — less expensive and more abundant than the more commonly used silver. Early investors include leading venture capital firm Blackbird Ventures, Mike and Annie Cannon-Brookes’s Grok Ventures and the Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
Dean Spaccavento – CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, REPOSIT POWER Reposit Power promises consumers no electricity bills for five years after the company designs, supplies and installs a solar system and battery at their home. Dean Spaccavento is CEO and co-founder (with Dr Lachlan Blackhall) of the Canberra-based business, which combines the installed hardware with software to optimise the combination of power storage and sale back into the grid. Reposit Power also partnered with Ausgrid to trial a decentralised system in which almost 1000 households operating under Reposit's system form a virtual power plant and avoid network congestion.
Chris McGrath — CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, 5B For Chris McGrath, a degree in engineering specialising in renewable energy led to a role at Infigen Energy. A passion for accelerating the global transition to greener energy then led to his founding 5B with Edan Tehan in 2013. 5B refers to five billion years of sun, an estimate of the remaining life of our sun and the energy potential within it, and the business aims to increase access to large-scale solar systems which are lower in cost and more energy dense than traditional models. 5B’s Maverick system is a portable, prefabricated solar array described as a "solar farm in a box". It has been rolled out in a number of projects, including a 12.825-megawattpeak array at Adelaide’s Happy Valley Reservoir.
Jemma Green — CHAIRMAN AND CO-FOUNDER, POWERLEDGER Perth-based Green founded Powerledger in 2016; its blockchain-based operating system software allows for tracking and trading of power, flexibility and environmental commodies. After starting with one retirement village in Western Australia’s Busselton, Powerledger now has more than 30 customers across 11 countries. The mission is to create a more flexible and responsive system that can better manage the vagaries renewable energy currently brings to the grid. "Powerledger’s technology creates the marketplace to keep customers connected to the grid and empowers them to control their energy future," says Dr Green.
Doug McNamee — CEO AND FOUNDER, JOLT With a key impediment to the uptake of electric vehicles being a lack of charging stations and the resulting “range anxiety”, the race is on to establish a nationwide network for easy charging. McNamee founded Jolt, which promises a “free, fast charging network” in which an app directs you to the nearest charging station and supplies the first seven kilowatt hours of power (taking about 15 minutes and allowing a range of about 45 kilometres) for free each day. Charging stations themselves are powered by Australian renewable energy and include screens which can collect demographic data and deliver content for advertising partners (McNamee’s background is in media and advertising). Global investor BlackRock last year injected $100 million into Jolt to fund the installation of approximately 1000 charging stations across Australia in the next three years.
Marcus Dawe and Sophia Hamblin Wang — CEO AND COO, MINERAL CARBONATION INTERNATIONAL Serial entrepreneur Marcus Dawe became inaugural CEO of Mineral Carbonation International (MCi) in 2013 and his half-sister Hamblin Wang joined as its first employee and COO shortly afterwards. MCi, the result of years of research and development, and millions of dollars in grants from both the federal and NSW governments, and mining services firm Orica, takes carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and turns it into building materials and other industrial products. With a team of 30, a head office in Canberra and research team at Newcastle Institute for Energy Research, MCi is now on track for commercial success, winning the Clean Energy Startup Competition at the COP26 UN Climate Change Conference in Glasgow and the Net Zero Technology Centre’s Clean Energy Startup of the Year.
Erich Kisi – CEO, MGA THERMAL STORAGE Materials engineer and Professor Erich Kisi leads MGA Thermal, a spin-off of the University of Newcastle which aims to enable the shift to renewable energy by providing a new way to store energy that’s clean, economical, and scalable. The company's technology harnesses a recently invented type of thermal storage material, Miscibility Gap Alloys (MGA), which is capable of storing huge amounts of energy safely. Modular blocks of MGA are stacked and scaled into thermal energy storage systems, storing hundreds to millions of kilowatt hours of energy. The business raised $8 million in 2021 in a round led by the CSIRO's Main Sequence Ventures, and also announced a partnership with Canada’s SNC-Lavalin to explore converting end-of-life-cycle fossil fuel-fired power plants into clean energy facilities.
Andy Evans — CEO, OCEANEX ENERGY
As co-founder and inaugural CEO of Star of the South, Andy Evans pioneered Australia's first offshore wind farm, proposed for Victoria’s Gippsland coast. With Oceanex, founded in 2020 with Peter Sgardelis, Evans is also planning floating wind farms and searching for suitable sites off the coasts of New South Wales, Western Australia and New Zealand. The projects are several years away, but if realised, will attract billions of dollars in investment and create jobs. Part of the challenge is accessing grid infrastructure from a wind farm set 30 kilometres out to sea, which is why site consideration revolves around existing coal station locations including Illawarra and Newcastle.
Dan Adams and Chris Thompson – CO-FOUNDERS AND CO-CEOS, AMBER ELECTRIC Five years after graduating with degrees in commerce and aerospace engineering, Dan Adams and his friend and former Boston Consulting Group colleague Chris Thompson founded Amber Electric to “unlock the value of renewable energy for everyone”. Amber's technology allows consumers to access electricity from the wholesale market through an app with a subscription-based fee. SmartsShift technology also aims to optimise household batteries, electric vehicle chargers and other smart devices. The Commonwealth Bank invested $20 million in a series B funding round in 2021, also launching a partnership which will see Amber customers access low-cost finance for home batteries and smart electric vehicle chargers.
Robyn Denholm — CHAIR TESLA; CHAIR, TECH COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA; OPERATING PARTNER, BLACKBIRD VENTURES "I hope that we as Australians stand up and play a significant role in the global renewable energy era," says Robyn Denholm, chair of Tesla, operating partner at Blackbird Ventures and chair of the newly invigorated Tech Council of Australia. In a 2021 speech to the mining industry, Denholm pointed out that Australia's natural resources including lithium and nickel could power the world's renewable energy hardware (including Tesla's electric vehicles: Denholm said last year that the EV powerhouse expects to source $1 billion of minerals from Australia annually). But, she says, innovation and technology must also play a role so that we can be more than just an exporter of commodities. "Apart from our natural resources, we also have a lot of expertise in this country that others do not have," Denholm says. "We have the highest penetration of rooftop solar of any country in the world and the largest virtual power plant trial to harness that rooftop solar energy into batteries that then power a local community."
Gavin Dietz — CEO, WATTWATCHERS Wattwatchers started in 2007 with the Auditor, a compact smart device designed to collect and deliver data about energy usage, which was the brainchild of a founding group including Chris Bean and Jon Keeble. In its current iteration, led by Dietz, the business is positioning itself as a digital energy platform which combines a family of devices suitable for a range of settings with data services and software. The startup is developing a consumer-facing data hub, partly funded by the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), to collect data to help consumers to make better decisions about their energy consumption and also share that data with third parties. A Series B capital raise in 2021 saw Melbourne-based impact investor Kilara Capital, headed up by the Smorgon family's Ben Krasnostein, invest $5.3 million, with a further $500,000 tipped in by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation.
David Finn, James Kennedy and Paul Sernia — CO FOUNDERS, TRITIUM Finn, Kennedy and Sernia first met as students at the University of Queensland, and founded Tritium in 2001 to commercialise the lightweight motor control technology they developed there for the UQ SunShark solar car racing team. Since then Tritium has gone on to develop a number of electric vehicle charging products, including the world’s smallest footprint DC fast charger in 2013 and a charger for a joint venture between Daimler, Ford, BMW Group, and the Volkswagen Group with Porsche AG in 2018. After a SPAC listing on the US NASDAQ early this year, Tritium is planning a US manufacturing plant that will significantly increase capacity.
Karl Mallon — DIRECTOR OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, XDI SYSTEMS XDI, the Cross Dependency Initiative, uses bespoke algorithms and analytics to assess the climate risk attached to individual physical assets, sites and areas, including their upstream and downstream interdependencies. Dr Mallon, with his team at Climate Risk Engines, has developed the scientificcomputing models behind this "whole system vision" for analysis. The mission? To allow decision makers and asset owners, be they business or government, to understand and manage the potential cost and impact of extreme weather and climate change and to then develop resilience and innovate.
TRAILBLAZERS Don Henry AM — ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY LEADER As Melbourne enterprise professor of environmentalism at the University of Melbourne, Professor Henry works with the Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute on supporting implementation of the Paris Agreement on climate change, and with the Centre for Sustainability and Business at Melbourne Business School both educating and advocating for corporate environmental responsibility. He has held a number of leadership roles with the World Wildlife Fund, both in the US and in Australia, was the longtime CEO of the Australian Conservation Foundation, and is an international board member of Al Gore's Climate Reality Project. Professor Henry has campaigned for decades on environmental awareness and action across Australia, playing a key role in the establishment of the Tasmanian Forest Agreement, optimisation of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan and protection of our oceans.
Martin Green AM — ENGINEER AND SCIENTIST, UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES While the moniker "father of modern photovoltaics" doesn't exactly trip off the tongue, it's apt for Professor Martin Green, who was instrumental in developing the solar cells that now power much of the world's renewable energy. According to UNSW, where Green is director of the Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaic, “the enormous reductions in costs in photovoltaic solar systems in recent years is directly related to [his] scientific efforts”. Green was awarded the prestigious Global Energy Prize in 2018 for his work on photovoltaics, the first Australian recipient.
Bob Brown — ENVIRONMENTALIST AND FORMER POLITICIAN Bob Brown's environmental activism stretches back 40 years to Tasmania's Franklin Dam blockade in 1982, during which he was jailed for 19 days. Dr Brown was subsequently elected to the Tasmanian parliament and then to the national Senate, where he was leader of the Australian Greens from 2005 until 2012. Much of Brown's activism has focused on Tasmania's forests. He used the proceeds of an environmental prize to help fund the purchase of land adjacent to a World Heritage Area in Tasmania, which led to the establishment of the Australian Bush Heritage Fund. More recently, he opposed a wind farm on Tasmania's Robbins Island on the basis that it would be detrimental to bird life with no significant benefit to Tasmania. He is patron of the Bob Brown Foundation, which aims to raise support and advocates for conservation campaigns in Tasmania and beyond.
Graeme Pearman AM — RESEARCHER AND CLIMATE CHANGE EXPERT Graeme Pearman originally trained as a biologist, but his research into atmospheric carbon dioxide extended into the realms of chemistry and physics and resulted in the publication of more than 150 scientific papers. He joined the CSIRO in 1971 and led the atmospheric research division there for many years. He has been a leading science communicator on the issue of greenhouses gases and their consequences for decades, instrumental in the establishment of the renowned Cape Grim Baseline Air Pollution Station in Tasmania in 1976, and receiving a UN Environment Program Global 500 award for his communication work in 1989.
Tim Flannery — SCIENTIST, AUTHOR, EXPLORER AND CONSERVATIONIST Scientist and author Tim Flannery is known for his environmentalist stance and long-term advocacy against coal-fired power stations, but he is also responsible for significant research and discovery in the fields of paleontology and mammalogy, including the discovery of several new species. He was Australia's chief climate commissioner, until the Climate Commission was shut down by the Abbott government after coming to power in 2013, and subsequently helped establish the independent Climate Council, with the aim of informing Australians about the science of climate change.
Geoff Cousins AM — BUSINESSMAN AND ENVIRONMENTALIST Geoff Cousins is well-known for several reasons: his former career as a high-flying ad man in the 1980s, his corporate board roles and decade as a consultant to prime minister John Howard. He was the founding chair of the Sydney Museum of Contemporary Art and established the Australian arm of the Starlight Children's Foundation in 1988. As an environmental campaigner, Cousins was involved in the high-profile and ultimately successful campaign against the Gunns pulp mill project in Tasmania and the Browse gas processing plant near Broome in Western Australia. As president of the Australian Conservation Foundation, Cousins also campaigned against Adani's Carmichael coal mine in Queensland.
Monica Oliphant AO — RESEARCH SCIENTIST In the early 1970s, Oliphant was a widow with two young children to support when she heard acclaimed virologist and Nobel Prize-winner Sir Macfarlane Burnet speaking on the radio about solar energy and its potential to end any global conflict about oil. This ultimately sparked what would be a 40-year career in solar energy, including two decades as a senior research scientist with the Electricity Trust of South Australia. In her award as South Australian Senior Australian of the Year in 2016, Oliphant was described as “an inspiring advocate for science and sustainability” who has “influenced the future of energy consumption around the world”. Oliphant, now aged 81, continues to work as a consultant on solar energy.
CREDIT: WORDS; PERRY WILLIAMS; VICTORIA BAKE
Word count: 11932
