The Australian Energy Market Operator says it does not expect power blackouts after it made the unprecedented decision to suspend trading across Australia's entire east coast electricity power network.
Electricity generators typically offer power supply for sale into the market and retailers buy what is needed for their customers. But in the past week power companies, which are paying sky-high prices for coal and gas, have repeatedly taken massive slabs of generation capacity offline as their businesses become less profitable, causing the volatility. The situation hit crisis point after withdrawals triggered AEMO to issue legally binding directions forcing companies to fire generation units back up to prevent blackouts, for which they are compensated. AEMO chief executive Daniel Westerman yesterday said there was no expectation for blackouts across the market covering Queensland, NSW, Victoria and South Australia, but asked NSW residents to "conserve energy where it's safe to do so". He said the balance between supply and demand would remain tight in coming days, particularly in NSW.
During an emergency press conference last night, NSW Treasurer and Energy Minister Matt Kean pleaded for the state's residents to minimise non-critical electricity usage between 5.30pm and 8.30pm, and blamed the state's "ageing infrastructure" for the widening energy crisis. Earlier in the day, Victorian minister Jacinta Allan said AEMO had advised that Victoria had adequate power supply.
AEMO on Tuesday forced generators to restart about 10 per cent of the grid's total generation capacity of 55 gigawatts. The withdrawals came on top of a series of breakdowns and maintenance outages that have forced about a quarter of the east coast's coal-fired power stations out of action.
Westerman said business as usual was "impossible ... under the current conditions". He said taking control of the market would simplify and improve the running of the grid by enabling AEMO to direct electricity supply where it is needed.
"Suspending the market is the best way to ensure a reliable supply of electricity for Australian homes and businesses. By suspending the market we are creating a simple process where AEMO has true visibility of which generators are available and when in advance, rather than relying on last-minute interventions."
Compliance watchdog the Australian Energy Regulator warned power companies they would be investigated for their role in the crisis and chairwoman Clare Savage warned they may have breached rules barring them from reckless behaviour without reasonable cause.
Economic pressures for power companies ramped up this week because AEMO slapped caps on the price they can charge for wholesale electricity, which suddenly became far more expensive to generate due to a spike in prices for coal and gas.
The Australian Energy Council said its members were losing money selling power due to soaring costs. Its chief executive Sarah McNamara welcomed AEMO's intervention.
"It is quite clear that in these unprecedented circumstances and following the application of [price caps], the power system was becoming unmanageable," she said.
AEMO will apply special suspension pricing for electricity generation and compensate power companies. It's not yet known what effect this will have on power bills.
Lisa Zembrodt of Schneider Electric, one of Australia's largest corporate energy advisers, said AEMO was "the foremost expert" and should be trusted to run what is a large and complex system. The transition to renewable energy had not sparked the crisis, she said, but pointed instead to a "confluence of factors" focused on coal plant outages, record high fossil fuel prices and the cold snap across the eastern seaboard.
"We've got to this point because Australia exports so much coal and gas, much more than we consume, and the war in Ukraine has created near-record high prices. When an electricity generator needs coal or gas [and they don't have a fixed price contract in place] they are paying exorbitant international prices."
Zenbrodt said while the crisis had been difficult to forecast, there was a need to ask why the grid was not better prepared. AEMO runs the day-to-day operations of the electricity grid. This is the first time since it was founded in 2009 that it has suspended the market, although it has previously suspended the South Australian and Tasmanian markets.
Grattan Institute deputy energy director Alison Reeve said the suspended market is "more reassuring . . . because it means there will always be supply to meet demand". With Sumeyya Ilanbey
CREDIT: Mike Foley | Climate and energy correspondent
Word count: 730
