After the shock of the doubling in petrol prices at the start of this year, many households are about to discover that their energy bills are rising, too.
The Australian Energy Regulator last week announced that the default electricity price will rise by an average of at least 8.5 per cent in NSW, or $119 a year, in south-east Queensland by 11.3 per cent and in South Australia by 7.2 per cent. In Victoria, the Essential Service Commission has raised the tariff by about 5 per cent. Price increases for small businesses will be even higher.
These increases are for the "regulated standard offer", a tariff which all electricity retailers must offer as a safety net to protect people from unjustifiably high prices. But the 90 per cent of households who have shopped around and found cheaper market rates will have to pay more, too, when their contracts expire. Gas prices are rising just as sharply.
These high power prices will add to the burden this winter on many families who are already struggling.
Some might be tempted to link these rises to the growth of renewable energy and the Albanese government's plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 43 per cent by 2030.
Peter Dutton, who is expected to win the Liberal leadership today, last week said he was worried about the ALP's target because, "we want to make sure that people can afford to turn the lights on".
Yet this reveals a misunderstanding about what is driving the current jump in power prices and how to fix it.
The AER, in announcing the price rise said it was due to "reductions in thermal generation resulting from unplanned outages and higher coal and gas prices".
In other words, prices are rising because ageing coal-fired power stations are breaking down, causing shortages, and the war in Ukraine has sent global coal and gas prices through the roof.
The coal-fired power industry is slowly "going broke", to quote former Energy Security Board chairwoman Kerry Schott.
Companies have announced that they will shut down about 20 per cent of coal capacity by 2030 and regulators say it could easily be 60 per cent.
Tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes has bought an 11 per cent stake in power company AGL and appears to have convinced the board to abandon its plans to split the company in two and send the old coal-fired power stations into a separate entity - which was seen as an attempt to delay their closureuntil 2045. He is not just trying to save the planet. He is doing it because he thinks he can make money.
The closure of uneconomical coal plants will reduce competition and supply in the short term but rather than wasting money prolonging their life, Australia needs a plan to balance the exit of coal with new sources of energy in the next few years.
It must allow Australian energy companies to build more renewables and back them up with batteries, and where necessary, "peak" gas plants that can be turned on and off quickly.
The Albanese government's plan to invest $20 billion in new high-voltage transmission lines is a part of this process since it will guarantee that the new power sources can reach consumers at a reasonable price.
It will take a few years for these investments to bring the grid back into balance. In the meantime, governments should offer targeted help to families who are facing temporary power price rises. NSW, for example, has just increased its Energy Accounts Payment assistance for people in serious financial hardship.
The dramatic shift in our energy grid out of coal and gas will create huge challenges, but renewables are not the cause of the problem. They are part of the solution.
The Sydney Morning Herald is bound by the standards of practice of the Australian Press Council. If you believe the standards may have been breached, you may approach the newspaper or contact the Council by email (info@presscouncil.org.au) or by phone ([02]92611930). For further information see press council.org.au.
CREDIT:
Word count: 673
