Climate of change?
I read with interest the responses to the "What do you want from the next federal government?" (11/4), with only a few of the respondents looking for action on climate change. It seems that unless the floodwaters are lapping at their door, there are still a lot of Australians who have listened to the denialists or who haven't grasped the implications of the latest IPCC report.
I live near a primary school and I am constantly amazed by the number of parents who arrive by car 15-20 minutes early to pick up their children and who sit in their car with the engine running and the windows wound up, idly scrolling on their phones. Maybe, just maybe, justifiable on a very hot day, but for the sake of the planet and your child's future, what about switching off and winding down the windows on a balmy Melbourne autumn day? (While we still have them.)
Ross Bardin, Williamstown
Change attitudes
Australian Principals Federation president Tina King implies that students with disabilities should be educated in a different "setting" ("Rise in proportion of disabled students expelled during pandemic", The Age, 12/4).
Until principals and politicians change their priorities, students with disabilities will continue to face such discrimination in Victorian schools, including formal and informal exclusion, and will be denied the mainstream education to which they are entitled.
Dr Gavin de Lacy, Donvale
The long way home
With cancellations, delays waiting for crew, sitting on the tarmac waiting for available gates to disembark, it took my wife and me 7½ hours to travel from Sydney airport to Melbourne airport with Qantas. Could this be a record?
Ron Mather, Melbourne
Please, an organ donor
It is great news that Melbourne's already impressive arts precinct is to be dramatically upgraded. At least one thing is missing from the plan. Hamer Hall still does not have an organ. Rather than a beautiful instrument complementing the architecture and completing the tonal resources of the hall, there is a hole in the wall covered by an ugly grill. Melbourne likes to think of itself as the cultural centre of Australia.
The Sydney Opera House, Brisbane Performing Arts Centre, Perth Concert Hall and the town halls of Adelaide and Hobart all have splendid pipe organs. Internationally, major concert halls have similar instruments that enhance the beauty and usefulness of those buildings. The important works that cannot be performed as was intended without an organ make Hamer Hall an also-ran.
Douglas Lawrence, Brunswick
Care for the young
As a parent, I am deeply concerned about the "generational betrayal" we are, perhaps unwittingly, inflicting on our young people ("Lift GST to halt generational betrayal", The Age, 12/4). For two long years they have dutifully followed governmental regulations to avoid COVID, largely for the benefit of older generations. All the while, through no fault of their own, they experience the intergenerational injustice of a worsening climate crisis and are faced with an escalated cost of living that leaves most young Australians believing they will never afford to own their own home. Their future is not looking rosy.
No wonder young Australians currently suffer a mental health crisis. For their sake, we cannot afford further complacency and short-sighted leadership. Strong tax reforms and science-based emissions reductions by 2030, packaged within some visionary and trustworthy leadership, would go a long way towards raising the hopes of the youth.
Amy Hiller, Kew
For the environment
Your editorial (11/4) focusing on the need to focus on the young in the federal election campaign is spot on.
Of particular importance is climate change and a need to power our nation with carbon-neutral renewable energy.
As I get older I continue to remind myself of future generations and their need to live on a clean, green planet.
A world where natural disasters are not caused by global warming.
I want to be able to tell my grandchildren and great-grandchildren that I voted for politicians who put the environment before anything else. I also want to be able to tell them that I became more of an environmental activist and walked the talk.
In this election, the environment should be front and centre of political debate.
And all generations should vote accordingly.
Tony Ross, Bunyip
German regret
As a German, I am very disappointed with Germany. Ukraine could have been an occasion to make up for monstrous historical wrongs. No economic sacrifices should be too big.
Ralph Bohmer, St Kilda West
Gotcha, begone
An opposition leader not being able to recall a fact when under pressure is simply one person doing what all of us have done many times in life. A prime minister not knowing the price of a loaf of bread or a tank of fuel is just a busy person who doesn't have his head around the minutiae of grocery shopping: nothing more.
These ambush questions tell us nothing about either man other than that they are imperfect humans like the rest of us. Journalists creating "gotcha moments" with inconsequential questions which are, at best, a memory test or trivia contest are doing great harm to the status of their profession and depriving voters of the important information of consequence that can help inform their vote.
It is not your job to create drama where it doesn't exist. We have had enough real drama in our lives over the past three years. A little perspective and professionalism please.
Andy Tester, Seaford
Tempest in a teacup
Anthony Albanese's gaffe is a storm in a teacup. Talking about storms: politicians and voters, and the media, need to focus attention on one question. Which party will have the most impact on climate change?
The UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres remarked in 2018, "Climate change is the defining issue of our time ... we face a direct existential threat ... climate change is moving faster than we are ... if we do not change course by 2020, we risk missing the point where we can avoid runaway climate change, with disastrous consequences for people and all the natural systems that sustain us."
Last week, he referred to "broken climate promises ... a file of shame, cataloguing the empty pledges that put us firmly on track towards an unliveable world". There are, of course, other important questions to be asked, but when the roof is leaking, that is the priority.
Dr Gregory White, Balwyn North
Independents' roots
David Crowe ("Independents take on Liberals and the old political model", 11/4) shows reasons for the significance of the "teal independents" in this poll, but the roots of their strength are deeper and stronger than those he cites.
These independents are distinctive not because they are women, but because they are all capable professionals with well-established, successful careers outside politics. They are not political careerists so common in major party ranks.
They have been sought and selected by, and from, the communities they represent. They share some common goals - strong action on climate, an effective federal ICAC, and equality and safety for women. Their communities share these goals and are dissatisfied with the representation they have received from their MPs. They are challenging Liberal and National members not because those MPs are moderates but because their parties have steadfastly refused to take action on any of these issues.
Chris Young, Surrey Hills
The poverty question
If Australians are going to vote against an opposition leader on the basis that he did not have at hand the current unemployment rate and the Reserve Bank of Australia cash rate then god help us. Maybe ask the PM how many people live in poverty?
John Rome, Mount Lawley
World upside down
With a war in Europe and gobbledegook from our politicians here, what's become of humanity? Equivocation ahead of achievement, economics ahead of courage, ambivalence ahead of humanity and fabrication ahead of truth.
Jeffrey Kelson, Prahran
Expel Russian envoy
The account (12/4) of Russian war crimes in Ukraine is horrifying. Russia's ambassador to Australia must be expelled. His presence here offends against all decency, all honour. He must go.
Anthea Hyslop, Eltham
Wealth tax
In calling for a higher and broader GST, Tom Akhurst and Josh Steinert do not address the major obstacle to such a reform (Comment, 12/4).
To be politically feasible, an increased GST has to compensate people affected by its regressive impacts through a combination of reduced income tax and increased welfare payments. But as Malcolm Turnbull discovered when he considered GST reform in 2016, once that compensation is accounted for, the increase in total tax revenue is modest.
If they are really concerned about the inequity of wealth distribution between younger and older Australians, why not a wealth tax?
They may have considered that idea but quickly agreed that they were not crazy or brave enough to suggest that.
Rod Wise, Surrey Hills
Where's the coal?
Has the 70,000 tonnes of Australian coal arrived in Ukraine yet?
Keith Robinson, Glen Waverley
CREDIT:
Word count: 1492
