Premier let Bara blaze take hold The NSW government doesn’t need more media staffers to spruik the state’s credentials, for all the king’s horses and all the king’s men mightn’t be able to put Humpty, that old anthropomorphic egg, back together again (Dom’s bid to wash away Bara scandal, 28/7).
I feel for Premier Dominic Perrottet, but it seems a similar set of issues that propelled him to the state’s highest office are the very same things that could see his government lose the next election.
It was never going to be enough for John Barilaro to simply withdraw from his New York posting.
Notwithstanding behind-the-scenes wrangling, Perrottet should have been seen to act decisively. He should have blocked or, at the very least, postponed Barilaro’s New York appointment.
In fact, it would have been even better for Perrottet to have abandoned the NY trade commissioner role altogether, but that would have required a style of lateral thinking that is difficult when you’re forced on the back foot almost from the get-go.
Jack Dikian, Mosman Pride jersey saga may cost Manly on and off the field Because of their religious beliefs, seven Manly players refused to wear the Pride jersey and stood down from the team to play the Roosters. They have also been advised by the police not to even attend the match because of concerns for their welfare and safety (Banned from Brookie, 28/7).
Now, remind me again how this all about gender diversity and everyone being equal.
The reality of professional sport is that if the team does not perform players will be dropped, the team won’t make the finals and the coach will probably lose their job.
Because of highly exaggerated controversy over the colours of a football jersey, Manly (who I don’t support) will be without seven of their regular first-grade players when facing the Roosters.
Should they lose the match and end up missing out making the finals by one point, it could turn out to be a very costly exercise.
B. Thompson, Cowra
A stand against division It’s about time that someone in public life took a stand against the spread of these divisive Welcome to Country ceremonies (Pauline flags her opposition to Indigenous welcome, 28/7).
We are one nation and one ­people. The absolute last place we should be dividing people is in our national parliament.
Well done, Pauline Hanson.
I hope many more have the courage to follow in your footsteps. Samuel Gordon-Stewart, Reid, ACT
Senator fails history lesson On Wednesday in the Senate during the Acknowledgment of Country reading by Senate leader Sue Lines, Pauline Hanson walked out of the chamber after interjecting that she didn’t and would never acknowledge Indigenous lands in Australia (Pauline flags her opposition to Indigenous welcome, 28/7).
Apparently Senator Hanson also objects to the Aboriginal flag being hung in the Senate chamber.
Tough luck, Pauline Hanson. By failing to acknowledge and respect the indisputable fact that the oldest living culture in the world exists in your very own homeland, you in your 60-odd years on planet Earth continue to display ignorance of ­history and culture.
Eric Palm, Gympie, Queensland
Building watchdog critical The Canberra ministerial wing is a great place to cut oneself off from the real world.
The building industry is different to other industries (Dutton probes on building watchdog, 28/7). It has always valued hard physical work and has given a start in this country to millions of migrants and a new start to people who have been to jail.
The industry uses a lot of expensive materials and equipment, and relies on working capital to keep operating.
Strikes and other union activity can quickly send builders bust to the detriment of workers and ­customers.
These attributes are why thuggish unions pray on the industry including its workers.
The industry needs its own strong regulator.
Peter Egan, Mosman
Losing our connections All I could think was yes, yes, yes reading the piece by Clarissa Bye (Calls going nowhere – Opinion, 28/7). Since being bombarded by Microsoft help desk, NBN support and Telstra support scam calls I ­rarely answer my mobile unless the caller name is in my contacts.
The obsessive use of robo responses at internet sites is also an utter frustration. As a consumer, if the response is not appropriate I go somewhere else. Read: A lost sale.
Meanwhile, government department websites appear to be designed to tell us what they are doing, not to help us do what we want to do!
Wayne Brown, Queanbeyan
Portfolio clash a bad idea The Minister for Climate Change and Energy Chris Bowen is gloating about the raising of the emissions reduction targets from 36 per cent to 43 per cent by 2030 (A lot of hot air – Opinion, 28/7).
Conflating two diametrically opposing forces into one portfolio was bound to cause ongoing conflicts, but which is more important – to supply an adequate dispatchable power for an expanding economy, or being dictated to by offshore ­environmental targets?
There are two absolutely essential things for society to function well and an adequate supply of power is one.
Australia could well be sleepwalking into a power crisis. Our naive politicians are slow to learn that intermittent renewable energy – even with battery storage – can’t replace the base-load power of reliable and efficient coal-fired power.
China produces more emissions in 17 days than Australia does in one year. Whatever we do as a ­nation is not going to do anything for the planet.
Also, if Australia doesn’t want to use coal, despite sending big ­shiploads of the stuff overseas every day, then why isn’t nuclear power on the table?
Alan Barron, Grovedale, Victoria
Plan may just be a fantasy The Albanese government keeps talking about the Labor Party’s plan to overcome the cost-of-living increases but that is all they say – we have a plan for the plan – but where is the plan (Hammered at the register, 28/7)?
Maybe they need to create a Labor “Fantasy” portfolio in their government with the motto: “The plan, the plan, the plan!” Shades of Fantasy Island, I’m afraid!
Nev, Menai
Cheer on shared humanity While obviously not as grandiose as the Olympic Games, I for one am excited about the upcoming Commonwealth Games and encourage all citizens to cheer on from afar our 400-plus Australian athletes (The Games liftout, 28/7).
At this time in our civil history, where we are consumed daily by the grim realities of the ongoing war in Ukraine, international tensions within our Pacific region, rapidly rising cost-of-living pressures and the lingering reverberations of Covid, we desperately need the unifying balm which the “Friendly Games” provides.
The presence of over 5000 international athletes from 72 nations in Birmingham, representing their countries with pride, will give us, ­albeit briefly, a much-needed ­sense of solidarity among humanity.
Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn, Victoria
Briefly … I have been on the organ donor register for many years and was surprised to hear that South Australia is the only state with it noted on driver’s licences (Donating organs can help save thousands of lives – Opinion, 28/7). I was sure it was on my licence but, indeed, after a check, it is no longer there.
John Stuart, St Fillans ●●● When will the NRL have a “We Don’t Give a Stuff Who You Are or What You Believe In” round (Banned from Brookie, 28/7)? Just like they used to for every round ever since the game was invented.
Peter Wilcox, Blayney
HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
Word count: 1277
