There are many good reasons why the major parties would rather not talk about climate, writes Nick O'Malley.
The disconnect is jarring when you look closely. After years of drought, fire and flood - and in the wake of a series of United Nations reports spelling out in terrible detail the catastrophic costs of inaction - Australia's major political parties are running cold on climate action.
On Wednesday, in the first leaders' debate of this election campaign, Prime Minister Scott Morrison and Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese did not mention climate change once. The issue was raised only in oblique terms after an audience member asked about electric cars.
Both parties have embraced emissions reductions targets out of step with Paris targets, although Labor's remains more ambitious.
It is not that Australians don't want more ambitious action on the climate crisis. Polls have shown for years that the overwhelming majority of Australians want action and are willing to pay for it. In its most recent poll on the issue, the Lowy Institute found that 61 per cent of Australians agreed with the statement: "Global warming is a serious and pressing problem" and the government should begin to take steps now, "even if this involves significant costs".
This compared with 10 per cent who agreed that: "Until we are sure that global warming is really a problem, we should not take any steps that would have economic costs."
And in choosing not to act, Australian political leaders are ignoring the increasingly strident pleas of the nation's neighbours and allies. Dr Ian Fry, an Australia climate specialist and diplomat who was recently appointed to be the UN's first Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights in the context of climate change, says Australia's influence in the Pacific has been diluted because of its reluctance to embrace climate action.
During last year's world climate talks in Glasgow, Fijian Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama told The Age that he had again asked Morrison for more action.
"It is no secret that we expect more from Australia on climate," Bainimarama said. "We've informed them before and we will continue to inform them.
"Opening coal plants shuts the door on the future of low-lying Pacific nations; whether you burn it yourself or you export it to others, coal has no place in this century." Environment Minister Sussan Ley approved three coal mines in the lead-up to the talks.
In a public forum last month, UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres took the unusual step of calling out Australia specifically. "A growing number of G20 developed economies have announced meaningful emissions reductions by 2030 - with a handful of holdouts, such as Australia," he said.
Nor are the main parties restrained by the business sector. The Business Council of Australia, which once opposed ambitious action, is now calling for more of it. Boardrooms across the country want more action, Anna Skarbek told The Age last year. Skarbek is the former investment banker who is now executive director of the non-profit climate change advisory ClimateWorks Australia.
Banks, insurance companies and investment houses are abandoning the same fossil energy companies that Australia's two main parties champion.
Australian business leaders such as Andrew Forrest and Mike Cannon-Brookes are pumping billions of dollars into renewable projects, not (only) because of concern about the climate, but because they see money to be made in new industries that are already exploding around the world.
So, why the Australian silence?
Climate change has long been a political graveyard for Australian politics. The nation was made rich by its abundant resources, particularly coal and gas. As a result, powerful incumbent industries, backed by media allies, have used their political might to turn public opinion against leaders who dared heed the warnings of scientists too closely.
And while public sentiment has today shifted, it has not yet shifted in the right places, one long-time Labor strategist said this week.
In other words, the main parties want to take key coal seats in places such as the Hunter Valley and around Gladstone without losing others in places like Sydney and Melbourne. Which means both parties are happy not to discuss climate policies that some voters will believe go too far, and others not far enough.
At the heart of any climate policy is an effort to cut greenhouse gas emissions in line with the Paris Agreement goal of holding global warming to beneath
2 degrees and as close as possible to
1.5 degrees.
According to the UN's chief climate body, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, this means the world needs to cut emissions by 50 per cent by 2030 and reach net zero by 2050.
But the IPCC pathway allows for developing nations to emit greenhouse gasses for longer than advanced economies to allow for the fact that they have lower historical and per capita emissions.
As a result, some experts say that Australia's reduction targets must be higher than the global average.
The Climate Targets Panel, a group of independent experts working with the University of Melbourne's Climate and Energy College, last year found that for Australia to do its share in holding global warming to 2 degrees, it must reduce emissions by 50 per cent on 2005 levels by 2030, and reach net zero emissions by 2045. To remain on track for 1.5 degrees, the targets would be 74 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030 and net zero emissions by 2035.
But targets, however ambitious they might be, are meaningless without a plan to reach them.
Any plan to achieve such a sweeping change in Australia involves a few common steps. First, the coal-fired energy system must be rapidly replaced with a mix of new renewable-energy generation backed by new transition lines and energy storage.
The states are already making headway on this, but experts say the process should be driven by the federal government.
"I can't believe I am saying this in 2022," says Associate Professor Christian Downie, a governance expert at the Australian National University. "But the first thing we need is a national climate policy to reduce pollution across all sectors of the economy. If we have leadership at the federal level rather than individual states doing their own thing, we will do this faster and more effectively."
As the energy system is decarbonised, an effective federal climate policy would then speed up the process of electrifying industry and households.
But there are other elements that climate policies should include, no matter which side of politics introduces them, Downie says.
"Legislative targets would be much stronger," he says. "They would show a strong commitment both from the government and the parliament. Of course, that requires negotiating through both houses of parliament, which can create its own complications, but that's something that the next government should be aiming to do."
And he says "serious" climate policy would be consistent across government. This would mean ending fossil fuel subsidies. "You can't continue to support gas-fired recoveries at the same time as we're claiming to be taking action on climate change. The two propositions are just inconsistent."
Finally, a government determined to move fast on climate would introduce an independent body to set Australian targets and ensure that the government is working towards meeting them.
"The benefit of having an independent agency is that it's insulated from the
kind of political volatility we've
seen characterise climate policy," Downie says.
"A good way to think about it is like an independent central bank. If the government set interest rates, they'd be moved around to suit election cycles, but we have a central bank, which is largely independent from the political process and can set interest rates based on fundamentals."
Such a body, similar to the Climate Commission created by Julia Gillard in 2011 and scrapped by Tony Abbott two years later, would ensure that the government was acting in concert on climate, with environmental, energy, agriculture and industry policy all set to support emission reduction efforts.
The Coalition's climate policy was largely finalised last year as Morrison prepared to attend the COP26 climate talks. After prolonged negotiations
with Nationals, Morrison confirmed
that the government would set net zero by 2050 as a firm target rather than a "preferred target". Despite intense international pressure it did not
increase its 2030 reduction target of 26 to 28 per cent.
The policy relies on effort to reduce emissions using "technology not taxes". Rather than mandating the use of cleaner technologies or setting targets, it seeks to make their use more commercially viable.
According to its climate change policy paper, The Plan to Deliver Net Zero: The Australian Way, 20 per cent of reductions required to reach the 2050 goal have already been achieved since 2005 and 40 per cent would come from its plan to invest in new clean technologies. Another 15 per cent would come from international technology trends, and, it believes, 15 per cent more would be delivered by technologies not yet invented.
Labor has promised a 43 per cent emissions reduction by 2030, or 2 per cent less than it took to the last election. Its Rewiring the Nation package would back state government efforts to support green energy with $20 billion to modernise and improve the grid to use more renewables, in line with a blueprint already drafted by the Australian Energy Market Operator.
Labor says the plan would decrease prices and increase the amount of renewables flowing through the grid used by the east coast states and South Australia to 82 per cent.
Its plan includes funding the creation of "community batteries" for groups of homes to share and the introduction of incentives for EVs. Controversially in climate circles, it supports an ongoing role for coal exports.
"Coal will be a part of Australia's energy and export mix for years to come," Labor's resources spokeswoman, Madeleine King, told The Age this week.
"If new projects stack up environmentally and commercially then they will of course go ahead. And if they stack up, we welcome the jobs."
The Greens policy has by far the most ambitious emissions reduction target: 75 per cent by 2030 and net zero by 2035. It includes measures to support households and small businesses get off gas through grants of up to $25,000 and loans of up to $100,000. It would offer grants for households to buy batteries and work with states and territories to ban gas in new housing developments.
The so-called Teal independents, who could share a crossbench with the Greens, do not have a common climate policy, but their various proposals are largely more ambitious than Labor's and not quite as ambitious as the Greens'.
Richie Merzian, who heads the energy and climate program at progressive think tank the Australia Institute, says of the three plans, only the Greens' emissions reduction target is in line with what climate science demands.
"It's based on Australia's historical responsibilities and current capacity to do so much more," Merzian says. "This level of ambition would align with the upper guardrail of the Paris agreement to keep global warming to 1.5 degrees."
He says Labor's short-term emissions reduction target of minus 43 per cent announced in December 2021 would put Australia alongside the updated targets of similar economies the US and Canada. Collectively, they would see global warming to exceed 2 degrees.
Merzian criticises the Coalition's short-term target of 26 to 28 per cent, set in 2015, as outdated, saying if the rest of the world followed suit we would be on track for 3 to 4 degrees of global warming.
In an annual assessment of climate action published by leading US university MIT last month, Australia's ranking slipped from 35th to 52nd, to sit neatly behind Saudi Arabia, whose oil minister Abdulaziz bin Salman vowed last year to drill "every last molecule" of hydrocarbon from the ground.
Christiana Figueres, one of the world's leading climate diplomats and a former executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, told The Age yesterday that
so far Australia's climate plans
were among the least ambitious
on earth.
"While the rest of the world stood up at COP26, Australia stood back," she said. "As a result, Australia has increasingly been pushed to the
margins of the international community and seen as a blocker, a country willing to expand polluting industries at the expense of the planet.
"Government administrations have repeatedly stalled on climate action, while the Australian people overwhelmingly support environmental responsibility."
CREDIT: Nick O'Malley
Word count: 2082
