Morrison & Co, which invests money on behalf of major institutions including the Future Fund and major superannuation funds, has been investing in renewable energy since 1994, spending $5bn in the sector globally over the past four years.
The appointment of Mr Campbell, who was Tilt’s chief executive from 2018 to its sale last year, will give Morrison more management firepower to look for renewable energy-related assets.
The Morrison-managed infrastructure platform Infratil had a 65 per cent stake in Tilt, which was spun off from New Zealand energy company Trustpower in 2016, listing on stock exchanges in Australia and New Zealand.
PowAR – a consortium owned by AGL, the Future Fund and QIC – bought Tilt’s Australian assets last year when Infratil decided to sell out.
“Renewable energy will continue to be one of the largest global investment opportunities over the coming decades as the world gets to grips with the need for energy transition and decarbonisation,” Morrison & Co chief executive Paul Newfield told The Australian on Tuesday.
“We are proud of the depth of our sector expertise which infrastructure investors regularly cite as a key differentiating factor when investing in us,” he said.
He said Mr Campbell, who will work across Morrison’s global energy portfolio, was one of the “foremost renewable experts” in the region. Tilt operated a portfolio including 1313MW across seven wind and solar farms across Australia and New Zealand at the time of its sale last year.
The New Zealand assets were bought by electricity generation company Mercury NZ.
Morrison’s global head of energy, Vimal Vallabh, said the company had a “long standing commitment to sustainability” and was currently growing its renewable energy platforms in Asia, North America and Europe.
As chief executive of Tilt, Mr Campbell oversaw several major deals including the highest price sale of a wind farm in Australia, in Snowtown in South Australia.
It also included the largest renewable power purchase agreement and the first wind farm power purchase agreement secured in New Zealand, enabling the first project financed wind farm to be built in the country at Waipipi.
Mr Campbell, who trained as an electrical engineer, has been involved in the renewable energy sector for more than 20 years, working at New Zealand renewable energy company Trustpower from 2001 before focusing on its spin-off, Tilt, from 2016.
Mr Campbell told The Australian that his appointment would “add some horsepower” to the team at Morrison, which was looking for more opportunities in the renewable energy sector around the world.
He said it could be easier for Morrison to invest in renewable energy now than it could have done through Tilt because of the constraints of a listed company.
“Some of the constraints which might have been on Tilt as a listed company, including having to keep in the less volatile areas of the renewable energy space, may not be the constraints (which face Morrison),” he said.
He said potential renewable energy investments in Australia by Morrison could include wind, solar or batteries.
But he said they could also include “some of the supporting technologies which are required to help the transition to renewable energy” which could include transmission systems or some of the feedstock for the components of renewable energy.
Morrison owns one of the largest wind farm operators in the US, Longroad Energy, which has bases in San Francisco and Boston. The group was also the underbidder in the sale of renewable energy company Pacific Hydro when it was sold by industry super fund investment group IFM in 2015, losing out to China’s State Power Investment Corporation.
Mr Newfield said Morrison had a “big focus” on taking its expertise in renewable energy management to the rest of the world.
“We have been doing this in the US for five years and also in the UK and we have just started in Asia,” he added.
Mr Newfield said solar power in Australia was less profitable than in the US because of regulatory issues. But he said that “over time, we will see wind, solar and battery storage being part of what we do in Australia”.
He said in the short term this was more likely to be in wind and battery storage given issues around the solar power industry.
Word count: 687
