Working for Denham Capital to sell Nexif, a portfolio of energy assets in Australia and Asia, is JPMorgan.
Nexif is 95 per cent owned by Denham, while management owns the remainder.
However, one dilemma is said to be whether to sell all of the assets in one line or parts of the portfolio separately.
Nexif has some renewable energy assets that are not in countries that are part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, while some renewable energy investors have only OECD mandates.
There is a view that Australian investors are unlikely to be able to make offers for the Asian part of the business that are as competitive as those of investors in the Asia region.
The opposite is true for investors in Asia when it comes to the Asia portfolio.
The portfolio of wind farms are spread throughout Vietnam, Thailand, the Philippines and Australia.
The 154MW Snapper Point gas turbine peaking power plant 22km northwest of Adelaide that is being developed by Nexif may also not be attractive to some investors.
Nexif is also developing the Lincoln Gap Wind Farm comprising 464MW of wind turbines near Port Augusta, also in South Australia.
The Houston-based Denham Capital was said to be planning to sell the portfolio by the end of the year.
It is understood that the business is held in a fund that reaches the end of its life in March.
One possibility is that the fund expiry date is extended to enable a reasonable time frame to run a sale process for the assets.
The other portfolio of renewable energy assets coming up for sale is Elliott Green Power Australia owned by Elliott Management Corporation, on offer through Azure Capital and Bank of America.
That portfolio is thought to be worth about $500m and is due to be offloaded by the end of this year.
Elliott’s portfolio of solar assets generate more than 300 megawatts. Its projects include the Susan River Solar Farm in Queensland, along with the Childers Solar Farm and Nevertire Solar farms in NSW .
Meanwhile, the growing theory around the market is that Fotowatio Renewable Ventures has shelved a Credit Suisse-run sales process for a 49 per cent stake in its 500MW Australian solar power portfolio that could be worth about $500m.
The process was launched last year, but it has been radio silence ever since.
The Spanish group had also earlier tried to sell its global energy portfolio through JPMorgan, but struggled to find a buyer.
FRV owns seven solar power projects and developments in Australia, at least some of which are contracted to Origin Energy.
There is also an opportunity to invest in a development pipeline.
Groups expected to bid for the renewable energy portfolios include First Sentier, Infrastructure Capital Group, Palisade Investment Partners, Lighthouse Infrastructure and the Dutch Infrastructure Fund.
Renewable energy is in favour right now at a time that unlisted funds are cashed up and are keen to get in on the trend towards cleaner power alternatives.
A challenge for some of the renewable energy portfolios on the market is they lack scale, so only buyers with existing portfolios are likely to find them attractive.
Market analysts believe consolidation is needed in the industry.
Word count: 515
