It is understood that a process to select an adviser for both businesses is under way.
Elliott’s sale of its renewable energy assets was flagged by DataRoom in December, with a divestment of its Australian portfolio expected to reap the global investment group more than $500m.
Denham Capital’s Nexif Energy portfolio is expected to have an equity value of more than $500m. It includes renewable energy assets in Vietnam, Thailand, The Philippines and Australia.
Elliott owns Elliott Green Power Australia, with solar energy assets that generate more than 300 megawatts.
Its projects include the Susan River Solar Farm in Queensland that delivers 180,000MWh of electricity each year, along with the Childers Solar Farm and Nevertire Solar farms in NSW that deliver 144,000MWh and 265,000MWh respectively.
Elliott Management manages two multi-strategy hedge funds that collectively have more than $US40bn ($54.8bn) worth of assets under management.
Investors include pension plans, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, foundations, funds of funds, high net worth individuals and families and employees of the firm.
Energy bankers are busy right now, with Macquarie Capital and Goldman Sachs working on the demerger of AGL Energy’s retail business, called New AGL, while the sales process continues for New Energy Solar through the Royal Bank of Canada, with its 110MW Beryl plan and 55MW Manildra facilities in NSW on offer.
First Sentier, Palisade Investment Partners, Lighthouse Infrastructure, Dutch Infrastructure Fund and ICG have previously picked up renewable energy portfolios and they are expected to be in the mix for other assets on the market.
Others for sale include BlackRock’s two solar farms in Queensland, known as The Gretel Solar Portfolio, which are on offer through Azure Capital and could be worth $300m.
A 49 per cent stake in an Australian portfolio owned by Fotowatio Renewable Ventures that could be worth about $500m is also for sale. FRV describes itself as a leading global developer of large-scale solar power plants. The assets on offer generate about 500MW.
Advisory firm Lazard was selling a 54 per cent stake in the $450m Ararat Wind Farm in Victoria, which is owned by Partners Group, but that has been withdrawn from the market.
In the past year, Tilt Renewables has sold to a consortium including Queensland Investment Corporation, AGL Energy, Mercury Energy and The Future Fund for $NZ2.96bn.
First Sentier acquired John Laing’s Australian wind farms for $285m before disposal costs and Infrastructure Capital Group bought Engie’s Willogoleche Wind Farm in South Australia and secured other development opportunities from Engie for $400m.
Analysts believe that sellers may be eager to offload solar energy assets.
Word count: 414
