Amp Energy, through its local arm Amp Power Australia, has bought a portfolio of large scale integrated solar, wind and battery storage projects, which once built, would generate 1.3 gigawatts of power.
Two of the projects, at Robertstown, north of the Barossa Valley, and Bungama, near Port Pirie, are expected to begin “staged energisation” in late 2022, meaning construction would have to start well before then.
Both have secured development approvals and land, Amp said.
“These two projects alone will create up to 550 equivalent full-time construction jobs including the regional workforce, and will generate electricity production to power the equivalent of 230,000 homes each year,’’ the company said.
“Total investment in the Renewable Energy Hub of South Australia would exceed $2 billion.’’
Amp said it was also positioning itself to be a player in the early stage but developing hydrogen industry, with a “Spencer Gulf Hydrogen Energy Ecoplex” on the cards, which would fit with the South Australian Government’s Hydrogen Action Plan.
“Two of the sites offer additional strategic value with the planned development of an integrated hydrogen production facility for both the domestic market and for export from the Spencer Gulf to Asia where Amp has existing operations,’’ the company said.
The Federal Government currently has $275m on the table for four new “hydrogen hubs” around Australia, with Whyalla identified as one of the potential locations.
Amp’s Yoorndoo Ilga project at Cultana (388MW) and the Bungama project (336MW) are well located to supply energy to hydrogen projects in the Upper Spencer Gulf.
Other SA hydrogen projects include a trial by Australian Gas Networks, using hydrogen produced at its HyP SA facility at Tonsley, which will blend 5 per cent hydrogen into the natural gas supply for homes in Mitchell Park.
That project is scheduled to start this month.
SA’s Minister for Trade and Investment Stephen Patterson welcomed Amp’s planned investment.
“South Australia has significant land mass and world-class wind and solar resources, with aspirations of reaching net 100 per cent renewable energy generation by 2030,’’ Mr Patterson said.
“We have seen over $7 billion invested in projects with another $20 billion in the pipeline.
“The Renewable Energy Hub of South Australia will be fundamental in integrating our state’s renewable energy storage assets and building our capability and supporting the fast-moving energy transitions we’re experiencing.”
Amp said it currently has 158MW of solar generation “operating or under construction’’ in New South Wales.
The new portfolio was bought from renewables consultancy EPS Energy.
More details on the projects can be found here.
Word count: 405
