FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 20
Wear your masks
I WENT to a Coles supermarket yesterday morning and was dismayed that about 20 per cent of customers were not wearing masks.
I am over the civil liberty nuts who say it infringes on their rights but who seem to think it is totally OK to ignore my right to not be endangered by a reckless fool.
Coles needs a rebuke for letting them in. And the guilty need a wake-up call by way of a warning or fine.
JOHN HUNT, Victor Harbor
Free delivery
AUSTRALIA Post needs money and we all need masks. Let’s fix two problems at once.
The State Government should post a mask to every house. This saves us lining up at the supermarket to find they have sold out.
JARRAH MULLER, Largs Bay
Drink, no exercise
PREMIER Steven Marshall has announced a severe lockdown for six days because of the risks of COVID-19 spreading.
No one is allowed out of the house to exercise during this time. How come, then, that bottle shops are open at this time when everyone is being confined to their homes to try to limit the community spread of COVID-19?
Time for exercise is not allowed, but bottle shops are allowed to be open so alcohol can be bought.
This fosters the possibility of domestic violence, an even greater risk with people confined to home.
I am a law-abiding citizen with a burning question requiring an answer.
DR KRYSTYNA ROWLAND, Hahndorf
Anger out there
YES, South Australians are angry – and have every reason to be so.
For months, we have listened to chief public health officer Professor Nicola Spurrier, Premier Steven Marshall and Police Commissioner Grant Stevens assuring us that the influx of expatriates wishing to return to Adelaide will be held in quarantine in medi-hotels with no risk to the public of SA.
And we trusted and believed them.
Most flights into Adelaide have brought infected people into our state and, although quarantined, they have proved to be a risk, after all.
This latest outbreak has shown us at least one weakness in the running of these medi-hotels, where a cleaner contracted the virus from a surface.
Why weren’t the people working at, or associating with, these hotels tested for the COVID-19 virus on a regular or even a weekly basis?
How is it that the abovementioned officials weren’t honest enough to apologise for this failing on their part?
We also need assurance that no more flights from overseas into Adelaide will be arriving until all medi-hotels are staffed with fully qualified and tested personnel.
E. HEATH, Mile End
Observe limits
STRANGE how time breeds indifference.
On Thursday, November 5, while observing the limit of three in the Central Market lift, a woman rushed in at the last minute.
Politely pointing out she was the fourth, we were gobsmacked when she pouted, shrugged her shoulder and said dismissively: “I’m over it.”
Perhaps now, in light of these new rapidly reinfecting strains of COVID-19, she might have realised how much she risked us in that lift.
ROSEMARY McGRATH, Dulwich
Tennis different
WHILE a strong supporter of efforts to control the COVID-19 virus, I am concerned about the indiscriminate restrictions on sporting clubs.
As an enthusiastic player of tennis I cannot understand, during partial lockdown periods, why tennis clubs have to be closed when social distancing is not a problem.
I think the decision makers should look at each sport separately.
COLIN ELLIS, Marino
Risk was real
EVERY time there was a confirmed case of COVID-19 at a medi-hotel, chief public health officer Professor Nicola Spurrier would appear on that night’s news bulletin assuring us there was absolutely no risk to the general public.
It now appears that her advice was incorrect. But there has been no apology or admission that she was wrong.
The risks from the medi-hotels are real and, given the circumstances of the Victorian outbreak, this should have been obvious to all those in charge in SA.
IAN WATHERSTON, Port Lincoln
Not complacent
IT’S a case of do as I say, not as I do.
We have been constantly told to not become complacent as that would lead to an escalation of COVID-19.
Why did the medical experts and Premier Steven Marshall become complacent?
Just because other medi-hotels did not test their staff, why did we follow like sheep?
Did we not learn anything from the Victorian situation?
It will be interesting to see if we get a full and unedited report of what went wrong and who is to blame.
DOMENICA CAVUOTO, Klemzig
PM in Japan
IT was good to see Prime Minister Scott Morrison advancing Australia’s interests during his brief visit to Japan.
I am hoping that on his return flight he intentionally passed over the disputed islands in the South China Sea.
Australia must remain vigilant in observing international law that these islands are in international waters with freedom of navigation by passing ships and planes. We cannot weaken under the ongoing threats from China.
BOB SCHNELL, Everard Park
Growing concern
JUST when we thought we had the virus under control, these words spoken by Benjamin Franklin might be relevant; “For the want of a shoe, the horse was lost. For the want of a rider, the battle was lost. For the want of a battle, the kingdom was lost. And all for the want of a horseshoe-nail.”
B. MARTIN, Port Adelaide
Nuclear thoughts
THE reason why “mostly older” people are advocating for nuclear power is that we know how to think for ourselves (“Full and frank”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
We are not influenced by the so-called informed opinions that younger generations post on social media. Nor by the press and electronic media who seem bent on perpetuating the myths in terms of available energy on this planet.
We are perhaps fortunate that when our ancestors were burned by the brand new energy source known as fire they chose to tame it, rather than running away screaming in fear.
All energy sources are dangerous, and people have been burned, gassed, electrocuted or simply blown into oblivion in countless numbers. But we still use these energy sources.
There are more than 140 nuclear power plants in submarines alone, circumnavigating the planet and pulling into large populated areas. This has been going on virtually without incident for 65 years.
Perhaps the Chicken Littles can explain to me why mobile nuclear power-plants floating around in an extremely corrosive and difficult-to-manage environment are both affordable and acceptable.
But the same installations built on dry land in stable conditions are not.
JOHN LUCAS, Somerton Park
Long battle
I WRITE regarding Tim White’s column about acknowledging the past and present service personnel and what they deserve (“Veterans battling to fix compo scheme”, The Advertiser, Monday).
I wish you well in your endeavours.
Having to deal myself with the UK equivalent to the Department of Veteran Affairs for an injury received 67 years ago to my left leg while flying on a reconnaissance mission over North Korea, I know that it can be an uphill battle.
Although I have had two small payments (in 2004 and a top-up in 2008), they have never considered my claim for a disability pension.
This has cost me dearly, not only from the pain, but also from a financial perspective.
Their answer is that now that my leg is arthritic, it is not a claim – but they cannot see that it was not that way when it was injured. Keep up the good work.
RAY HUMPHREY, Golden Grove
Bring back paste
NORM Bennett is pleased Bega has won the logo battle for peanut butter (“Aussie nuts”, The Advertiser, November 16).
But, to win him, they need to use all-Aussie peanuts.
I suggest they go back to using the old Aussie name for this spread.
I well remember, 50 or 60 years ago, buying Bega peanut paste.
ALAN MOSKWA, Beulah Park
Hugh backlash
WHAT is happening in this world of ours?
I cannot believe the “angry backlash” over Hugh Sheridan’s role in an LGBTQIA-themed stage play because he isn’t transgender (“Sheridan told: it’s not us, it’s Hugh, The Advertiser, Thursday).
For goodness sake, he is an actor. And that is what actors do.
They play roles that are completely different to their actual gender.
Does this mean men or women cannot be cast in a role that is not in line with their actual gender?
And they cannot play the opposite sex in a stage play or film if they are not the same sex as the role of the character they are cast to play? The comment in the article attributed to the Queer Artists Alliance claims that the choice of Sheridan for his role “was offensive and damaging to the trans-community”.
Who do the Queer Artists Alliance think they are?
They are trying to influence the organisers of the stage play in who they select to play the role.
They are trying to force this politically correct attitude on the general public.
B. STAPLETON, Golden Grove
One in, all in
DEAR Brian Measday, you have been indoctrinated far too long (“Fires and climate”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
To reduce the impact of climate change, it’s the entire planet that needs to take real and urgent action.
Our efforts alone are meaningless without the co-operation of the major northern hemisphere polluting nations.
Climate is a global phenomenon, not an isolated Australia only event as your writing seems to suggest.
ELDERT HOEBEE, Torrens Park
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19
Medi-hotel jobs
YESTERDAY’S press conference has dramatically reduced my confidence in South Australia’s management of the coronavirus.
The State Government completely and utterly failed to learn an important lesson from Victoria: People must not work in a second workplace if they work at a quarantine hotel.
That was a transmission path way. Exactly the same thing has happened with one of the quarantine hotel workers who also worked at the Woodville pizza shop.
The government also failed to test regularly and adequately back-of-house workers at quarantine hotels. Given these two serious lapses, which should not have occurred, I shudder to think what other horrors await South Australians because of poor and unacceptable practises.
MARK SYMONS, Norwood
Flight testing
I RECENTLY arrived home from Phuket.
Before my departure, I volunteered for a COVID-19 blood test 72 hours and returned a negative result.
I then boarded a local flight to Bangkok and, on arrival, was tested for my temperature only. I then boarded a plane 24 hours after arriving in Bangkok en route to Sydney.
When I arrived at Sydney airport, I was again tested for temperature only. From the airport, we were transferred to a nominated quarantine hotel in Sydney. On arrival, we were all tested for our temperature.
Three days after our arrival at the hotel, it was only then that we all underwent an appropriate medical test with a nose and throat swab.
Before leaving Phuket, I contacted the Australian embassy in Bangkok and asked if I was required to have a medical certificate to clear me to fly from Bangkok to Sydney. I was told I did not.
Clearly, there are some significant flaws in the system.
MICHAEL REGAN, Adelaide
Long queues
THE amount of staff provided by this Liberal Government to conduct COVID-19 testing is so inadequate as to be an absolute joke.
My daughter and son-in-law queued at Elizabeth on Tuesday for 8½ hours waiting for testing while we babysat our grandchild.
That’s 8½ standing in strong sunlight with no shade available is not good enough.
Many parents were standing in this queue with preschool children. This is simply not good enough.
And this is happening at every testing site!
Premier Steven Marshall needs to loosen the purse strings and get as many testing staff at all sites as quickly as possible.
Yet nursing staff numbers have been decimated by offering redundancy packages.
The ridiculous “we’re doing all we can” slogan is being trotted out to try to cover the penny-pinching antics of this government.
South Australians have been excellent in adhering to all of the protocols advised, yet are being treated with disrespect by Marshall and his government.
P. CHAPMAN, Lewiston
Safety concerns
I GO on holidays for six days with the proud perception that SA is the safest state in the whole country.
Then I come back to a state in lockdown.
All because of one individual that, knowing they were working in a quarantined environment, failed to adhere to safety standards and protocol.
And, as a result, they infected their family and, through their travels, members of the community.
Why was this allowed to occur in the first place? Why wasn’t the individual instructed on safety procedures?
STEVEN R. HOOD, Dernancourt
Eliminating virus
WHAT is happening in SA right now should make it clear to everybody with an iota of brains that we, the people, have been lied to by our governments – state and federal alike – about the real purpose of the COVID-19 strategy.
It has never been about being able to suppress the virus so that our health centres, in particular intensive-care units, were not overrun.
It clearly was, and is, about eliminating and eradicating the virus.
Many people in the health profession will tell you – the World Health Organisation included – that that is impossible to achieve.
Which leaves us with the question: Why?
That is, what is to be achieved by imposing those draconian coercive measures, then partly removing them, then reinstating them again whenever politicians and high-ranking bureaucrats want, all along expecting blind obedience from the people?
One is only asking the powers that be this question simply in order to avoid listening to, and starting to believe in, conspiracy theories.
While waiting for our politicians to answer this question, perhaps readers could think of some rational answers.
MARIO MOLDOVEANU, Frankston, Victoria
Let’s unite
I HAVE read the numerous articles and letters in The Advertiser concerning the latest outbreaks of COVID-19.
Sure, it is easy to criticise and say we have become complacent in some areas. And act as if COVID-19 did not exist.
But now is not the time to play the blame game.
Now is the time to unite like we have been doing these past few months, earning SA the reputation as a safe place to live while the COVID-19 pandemic was – and continues – to wreak havoc on many other countries.
Don’t panic. Go back to strict adherence to the health protocols and stay calm.
We will ride this out and our leaders will be the force behind our recovery.
But my opinion is that I would like to see mandatory testing of all SA people to find the carriers and rid COVID-19 in the state for good.
DES KEMP, St Agnes
More checking
QUARANTINE in our medi-hotels has been considered to be the gold standard, with safeguards seemingly as good as anywhere in Australia.
So, doing a bit more than weekly testing of the hotel employees and guards seems warranted, given how precarious is the situation we find now ourselves in.
If we are to continue to take in Australian citizens in the future we should at least insist on a very recent COVID-19 test before they fly back – and isolate overseas rather than here if positive.
Second, quarantining in the middle of a big city enormously increases the chances of spread of the virus.
Quarantining in a smaller country town would be much safer and make tracing more manageable as well as potentially saving lives and jobs.
MARK SHEPPARD, Unley Park
MPs deserve cars
REX Jory’s attack on the provision of cars to state MPs is an unfair cheap shot (“Opinion”, The Advertiser, Monday).
As a former MP who used the scheme and left politics five years ago, I am happy to support the employment conditions of our MPs, including this scheme.
Mr Jory argues the scheme is “a rort” because state MPs are not charged full-cost recovery. They are charged a $7000 annual contribution for provision of a car.
This is 10 times the amount paid by federal MPs, who pay just $700 a year, and $7000 more than some council mayors pay – as they get a car for nothing.
The reason it’s not full-cost recovery is that it seriously disadvantages regional MPs who have enormous electorates. This means they travel many times more kilometres than city-based MPs.
In the time I wore out one car some regional MPs would go through four.
The system of MPs’ allowances tries to make the support to MPs as even as possible and this is reflected in the car scheme.
The reason some ministers use the scheme, even though they have a ministerial car, is that the ministerial car is generally restricted to ministerial duties and not electorate work. So for electorate work they use their electorate car.
Most MPs work 60-80 hours a week for their $200,000 salary.
Based on a 50-week work year, that is from $50-$66 an hour before tax.
While $200,000 sounds a lot, I think the taxpayer is getting value from state MPs.
In a modern workplace environment, and the calls on an MP’s time in modern politics, the question is not why MPs are only paying $7000, but why are they paying anything at all.
IAIN EVANS, Heathfield
Full and frank
I FIND it extraordinary that Dean Jaensch would argue there is resistance to “a full, frank and informed debate about nuclear power” (“Hey Australians, let’s talk about nukes”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Has he forgotten a little thing called the Nuclear Fuel Cycle Royal Commission?
A royal commission is the fullest, most frank and informed discussion you can have. And the response from South Australians was a resounding “no”.
It makes zero sense why (mostly older) people keep trying to revive the push for nuclear when renewable energy beats it hands down on price, safety, social acceptance and sustainability.
C. FAULKNER, Cheltenham
Nuclear reasons
DEAN Jaensch asks why we have written off nuclear energy in Australia.
There are four obvious reasons for this.
The emotive environmental argument asks: Can we prevent an accident?
No, we can’t. We try, but it cannot be ruled out. Renewable-energy plants can blow up too, but won’t endanger anyone 1000km away.
The financial argument: The costs of design, construction, maintenance and (unknowable) decommissioning of nuclear plants are huge and increasing. Renewable costs are shrinking and do not have the massive decommissioning costs.
We need energy now, so time is a factor. Can we wait 25 years or more for a nuclear plant to come online? A renewable plant can be operational in 25 months.
Are centralised power generators with complex distribution grids required for nuclear plants still the best direction for energy?
Would a series of smaller, localised, renewable plants be more reliable, cheaper and effective for producing and distributing energy?
Given all this, what advantage is there in going nuclear?
COLIN FRASER, Sheidow Park
Divided US
THE United States really is a misnomer.
D. G. PITT, Plympton
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18
Bush medi-hotels
SOUTH Australia has mirrored Victoria’s second wave of COVID-19.
Once again, a so-called medi-hotel was the source.
How idiotic to house people who may carry a potentially life-threatening disease in a hotel in a highly populated city environment.
Why are they not sent to Woomera or Port Augusta? Why not Australian Defence Force bases?
In the Northern Territory, they are sent to Howard Springs, away from the populated area.
There should be an investigation as to who authorised the hotels to be used.
But, as in Victoria, it will be difficult to pin it down.
I suspect big money could be a factor.
JOHN BLACK, Murray Bridge
Thanks warranted
I WOULD like to say a big thanks to the South Australian Government.
And also the good people of Adelaide for getting COVID-19-tested in such big numbers. And also thank you for all the reporting and advertising in The Advertiser.
Thanks again for keeping us all safe.
BRENDA BROWN, Wynn Vale
Economics crucial
WELL that didn’t take long – letter writers blaming all and sundry for the so-called COVID-19 outbreak.
All politicians think of is the economy, writes Robert McCormick, of Bridgewater (“Opening mistake”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Obviously, he cannot fathom that economics is an important fabric of society.
My guess is he is probably not affected by business closures, other people’s mental health, or the fact that most COVID-19 sufferers will recover.
But let’s not let facts get in the way of yet another good scare campaign.
Kudos to NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian for showing some common sense regarding border closures.
Let’s hope she doesn’t bow to pressure by other scaremongers, despite the backflips by most other premiers agreeing on what actually forms a “hotspot cluster”.
EDWARD CZERWINSKI, Tennyson
Scathing criticism
I REFER to the letter of Robert McCormick concerning his criticism of the latest outbreak of COVID-19 in South Australia.
His scathing criticism is attributed to “those running the show” and condemnation in detail is totally unjustified.
While everyone in Australia and people all around the world have been effected in some way during this pandemic, some have experienced incredible heartache.
And the loss to many has been immeasurable.
The letter to which I am referring was one of the most hostile rants I have read during this disastrous time.
I believe that we in SA have been more fortunate than most and the numbers have proven that.
MARGARET CONSIDINE, Mount Gambier
More testing
I FIND it incredible that there has not been mandatory testing for occupants and staff in medi-hotels. Why not make it mandatory for anyone flying into Australia to self-isolate for 14 days before arrival?
JUDE CRAWFORD, Norwood
Learning curve
IT seems that Premier Steven Marshall and chief medical officer Professor Nicola Spurrier have learnt nothing from the Melbourne quarantine debacle.
Not to make the wearing of masks and gloves compulsory for all staff in a COVID-19 quarantine hotel and not to require compulsory COVID testing is the height of complacency and incompetence.
They have failed the people of SA.
CHRIS ADEY, Allenby Gardens
Virus anger
FOR the past seven months, South Australia had no community-transmitted COVID-19 cases.
But the State Government still imposed exorbitant restrictions on everyone, causing financial hardship, loss of jobs, declining health and unnecessary suffering.
SA Health had the audacity to not even impose mandatory testing for the staff working in the medi-hotels (the only place in SA with COVID).
Sections of the community are extraordinarily angry.
Especially as we all have sacrificed so much – especially the private sector – while these government employees who haven’t lost a single dollar of income this year, and still hold a job, can’t even manage to run a medi-hotel.
Premier Steven Marshall, chief medical officer Professor Nicola Spurrier and SA Health chief executive Dr Chris McGowan all need to be held accountable.
DAVID LONGTREE, Linden Park
Paper trail
PERHAPS if state and territory governments did not overreact to a COVID-19 outbreak by shutting borders, simple-minded people wouldn’t panic-buy when it comes to toilet paper.
Trucks cross borders, trucks carry toilet paper (it doesn’t matter that it’s made in SA), so trucks can’t cross borders with toilet paper if borders are shut.
Panic buy, panic buy, panic buy.
MARK THOMPSON, Newton
Toilet humour
IF Donald Trump were premier of SA, he would doubtless have advocated the real reason for the recent unfortunate COVID-19 outbreak.
It is a conspiracy by the makers of toilet paper.
GERRY GREENWAY, Netherby
Medical checks
I’VE been waiting for this to happen. The travellers at all these medi-hotels are quarantined but the hotel employees and other workers are not.
They are exposed day in and day out to possibly infected people but are then free to leave and go wherever they want. And guess what – this is what happens.
It’s been an accident waiting to happen for months, and it is really surprising that it hasn’t happened before now.
As long as SA allows travellers in from overseas without a mandatory quarantine period before getting on a plane, we will continue to play Russian roulette with the health and lives of South Australians.
This has to stop, now. It’s been good enough for these people to live overseas for years.
And now things are getting tricky in other countries, they all want to come home.
Why are we letting them? They’re putting us at risk.
A.R. GRAY, St Agnes
Loo-roll limerick
PEOPLE should learn to taper.
Their need for toilet paper.
So when they get the runs.
It’s available by the tons.
And so satisfies their caper.
K.G. LENON, Whyalla Stuart
Microphone need
WHAT is the point of having live media conferences from premiers, health officials and anyone really, when there is no roving microphone to allow the question to be heard?
The latest example is from Monday afternoon, when chief public health officer Professor Nicola Spurrier fronted the cameras.
Her answers were delivered but to what question we had no idea.
For goodness sake, organisers, surely you can do better than this. It’s not rocket science.
MICHAEL FORD, Minlaton
Name and shame
REGARDING “Robodebt victims win $1.2bn in compensation” (The Advertiser, yesterday), taxpayers are having to pay back $1.2bn to 400,000 Australians who were the target of this failed government policy.
And what did we get in response to the obvious criticism? Prime Minister Scott Morrison had made “quite a sincere apology” previously.
My understanding is that there would have been at least five cabinet ministers involved in the decision to go ahead with the project against strong resistance and legal objections from many quarters.
Why is it, then, that those responsible and their advisers have not been named? We are entitled to at least that.
GARRY TURNER, Port Pirie
Robodebt roles
AT last, the Federal Government has settled the class action on the robodebt debacle, but it will be important for the architect of the scheme to admit he got it horribly wrong.
Over to you, Prime Minister Scott Morrison.
GRAHAM THOMAS, Seaford
Support ADF
ALL defence-service members, whether female or male, deserve our support because they all put their bodies on the line to help us all around the world.
We are so proud of them all because they risked everything for us all.
GRAHAM and MARGARET KLINGBERG, Wallaroo
Seasonal plants
I WAS pleased to read Susie Burrell’s article highlighting the gut – and real health – benefits, extensive variety and economical advantages of eating seasonal plant foods (“Plant a flag for better living”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Consumers who choose not to eat animal products do so for environmental, human health and ethical reasons.
DIANE CORNELIUS, Seacliff Park
Fires and climate
THE harsh reality of possible bushfires must surely be paramount in the minds of many Australians at the present time.
The link between climate change and the 2019-20 bushfires in Australia is strong.
For many years, scientists have warned that human-induced climate change will greatly increase the risk of extreme bushfires in Australia.
The royal commission into national disasters, which wrapped up late last month, includes considerable references in relation to climate change and the 2019-20 bushfires.
The commission report makes it clear that more extreme bushfires can now be expected as a result of climate change.
Will it take a repeat of the devastating 2019-20 bushfires to see the Federal Government finally take real and urgent action in relation to climate change?
BRIAN MEASDAY, Myrtle Bank
FOR THE RECORD
ON Saturday, The Advertiser published an article that suggested that, on the prosecution case, NCA bombing suspect Domenic Perre was seen purchasing red phosphorous before the explosion. The article was incorrect. The prosecution alleges that, prior to the NCA bombing, there were very few locations in South Australia that stocked the chemical, and one of the businesses that did had been frequented by Perre “for two to three years”.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17
Hotel outbreak
IT is disappointing that we now have a COVID-19 outbreak in South Australia originating from a medi-hotel.
Were we so busy sneering at Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews that we learnt nothing from their experience?
Are we employing low-paid, poorly trained staff in quarantine hotels here?
Haven’t we worked out that such staff need to work across multiple jobs, dealing with vulnerable people, in order to earn a living?
Isn’t it yet clear that having workers moving from one susceptible group to another is a recipe for a COVID disaster?
LESLEY BRETAG, Warradale
No surprise
READING about the new COVID-19 outbreak, I ask: Is anyone surprised?
I certainly am not.
As this spread was only a matter of time after the foolhardy decisions made by our State Government.
The government let people pour into our state, mix on buses and trains and attend the totally unnecessary sporting events we could have done without.
Also, the Christmas Pageant, where most were excluded anyway, was still too unsafe.
Community transmissions could run into the thousands.
Sadly, the people who have done their best to prevent this deadly recurrence, especially the health workers who have risked their lives, have been let down by those who should have protected us.
Surely the lives of our own citizens are far more important than sporting and entertainment events.
No wonder other states have closed the borders to SA.
CHRISTINE PIERSON, Kensington Park
Testing regime
GIVEN what we know about asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic transmission, any compulsory-testing regime for staff in quarantine hotels based only on symptoms is clearly not good enough and certainly not gold standard.
Very disappointing.
GERRY KRIEG, Hackney
Opening mistake
HERE we go. Those running the show were so scathing of the other states and territories.
So arrogant and so proud of what they claimed to have done, including giving Police Commissioner Grant Stevens a massive pay rise, when it was the regular cops on the beat who actually did the work.
Then they decided it would be OK to open up SA. And what a massive mistake that is proving to be.
The second wave of coronavirus has arrived; one day four cases, the next 17 and that may explode.
The people who must take most of the responsibility are our stupid politicians. All they could think about was the economy.
They don’t care about the people of SA.
Well, if the underfunded, inept public-health system and its hospitals are full of sick and dying people the economy doesn’t matter.
Those running the show are totally responsible and they should all move aside.
ROBERT McCORMICK, Bridgewater
Vaccine plant
IT is good to see the Federal Government planning ahead by underwriting a new factory to produce COVID-19 vaccines. It’s a pity the government‘s denial of climate change means we are completely unprepared for the impact of high temperatures and, in particular, the bushfire risk.
ANDREW HIRST, Bowden
Trade positives
OUR Federal Government’s newly announced free-trade deal with 14 other Asia-Pacific nations cannot be underestimated.
It is the largest free-trade deal ever entered into and is of enormous importance, considering a fifth of the workforce in Australia is in trade-related activities.
The fact that it includes economic heavyweight Japan indicates its enormity. It should hopefully also pave the way for a circuit-breaker in our relationship with China.
Enormous credit should be directed to the government for the part it has played in securing this deal.
One would expect it will prove to be crucial in the economic recovery so very much needed in a post-COVID world.
BRUCE BURFORD, Adelaide
Avoiding war
I AM the child of a Holocaust survivor. My Italian father was captured at 17 by the Nazis and then placed into Dachau concentration camp to do slave labour.
Like many of the generation, my grandparents have experienced two wars in their lifetime.
War affects more than those sent to fight it.
It is time for all countries to end war and stop fighting the wars of others (“Lost in no man’s land”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Give praise afterwards to those who survive but there is also the guilt countries feel for sending them there.
Thank you to those who have faced war for the rest of us, or lost many in the process while struggling to save themselves, and their mental health, in the process.
War is dangerous. Those who make the decisions to send troops often do not have to face war themselves.
We are fighting a COVID-19 war right now. This should give all a taste of danger while fighting an enemy.
CLAUDIA TREGONING, South Plympton
Trees must go
ONCE again, I read a letter in which a person is complaining about the removal of trees to make way for housing development.
Did the same person complain when land was cleared to build his house, to construct a road on which he travels, to develop a shopping centre where he shops or to build a hospital to take care of the sick?
Hypocrisy springs to mind.
IAN WATTS, Athelstone
Pollie respect
ANYONE curious as to why politicians are held in such low esteem need look no further than Rex Jory’s latest column (The Advertiser, yesterday).
He reveals that the taxpayer-subsidised car-lease perk enjoyed by our state members of parliament hasn’t been increased for 15 years.
Not a good look for our snouts-in-the-trough brigade.
Rex suggests this scheme is “a rort that should be shut down” and its continuation without adjustment would be “close to scandalous”.
Cynics might suggest that the only change would be an increase in the number and salaries of spin doctors to counteract this negative perception of our MPs.
BERNIE COATES, Modbury North
Buy your own car
REX Jory questions why taxpayers should subsidise MPs for the unlimited use of a car at well under current market costs.
I would query why they are subsidised at all with their salaries above $200,000.
I figure they should be able to afford a car for their family, as many are also entitled to chauffeur-driven cars for their work duties.
With the cost of living rising quite dramatically in the past 15 years for us ordinary mortals, it is indeed a puzzle why the politicians manage to escape that. Of course, it is the parliament (in this case the previous Labor parliament which was particularly generous to its mates) which nominates the parliamentary Remuneration Tribunal of SA which, in turn, sets the MP salaries as well as their perks.
So, I guess it is a dog-chasing-its-tail situation.
Well, at least we don’t subsidise helicopters for them.
A. BOWERS, Glenelg North
View constitution
HOW heartening it is to see that the Chilean people are totally rewriting the country’s constitution imposed on them by brutal dictator Augusto Pinochet and only tinkered with for decades after he was finally removed.
All constitutions are products of the time when they were written and, hence, the context of the time including the knowledge (particularly scientific) and culture.
The Australian Constitution was written more than 120 years ago when the knowledge and culture were vastly different to that of today so many parts of it are fundamentally anachronistic.
In particular those parts which refer to, or do not refer to, the original inhabitants of this land who lost nearly everything when the British invaded.
Although we belatedly gave them the right to vote a few decades ago, we give them little or no say in the decisions made in federal parliament which affect their lives.
So, let us write a statement in our constitution which gives our Aboriginal people a voice in parliament and do it now.
TONY PADDICK, Woodcroft
Changing world
LAST week, I saw a Labor politician defend Joel Fitzgibbon’s stance, stating that climate change will have to take a back seat in the current environment.
I gather he was referring to the impact of COVID-19 on the economy.
But I doubt very much the laws of nature will sit quietly back and wait until politicians are ready to act on reducing emissions, or preparing us for the undeniably increasing dangers of violent weather events.
Chasing votes by pandering to the fossil-fuel industry is so passe.
Switching the focus from coal to gas is not the answer. And fracking in this dry continent where underground water is vital, is an outrage.
HEATHER LAUTERBACH, Victor Harbor
AFL rule changes
YES, Kevin Bartlett, “the fabric of the game is being destroyed” (“KB: Why modern footy ‘bores the s. t out of everyone’,” advertiser.com.au, yesterday).
The AFL is now a shadow of the once glorious, exciting game.
Go back several years, remove the stupidity of the full back running into the field to kick from a behind and get rid of the confusing advantage interpretation.
Players stop on the whistle so when a free kick has been awarded it should be taken by the player imposed against.
Who cares if there are not two ruckmen at a bounce, throw-up or throw-in.
The awarding of consecutive 50m penalties if an opponent dares to run to the mark with the player without impediment is so pedantic, that it is stupid.
During the early stages of the pandemic, a local TV station showed games from “the vault”.
There was absolutely brilliant kicking, marking and bumping.
Today, the bump has become a different type of four-letter word.
These games showed just what a great spectacle Australian rules football was, not the scrumming, all-over-red-rover pileup we see today.
In closing, prior opportunity seems to differ from umpire to umpire, and in some instances is a time lapse within which it would be impossible for the player with the ball to belch.
Let alone dispose of it legally by hand or by foot.
ALLEN RENFREY, Rostrevor
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 16
Owning Oz
IT is pleasing to read James Wagstaff’s article about Australian ownership of our farming and pastoral land (“Biggest lords of our land”, The Advertiser, Friday).
Frankly, it is good to see such a high percentage of local ownership, especially in view of some headlines of recent years.
It would be even more pleasing to read an equally full and detailed list of foreign-owned properties, broken down into country of ownership.
This could be enlightening and allow more informed decisions in many areas.
PAUL BUXTON, Westbourne Park
V8 decider
JUST gotta say, David Penberthy, you are so right (“Premier’s V8 decision is all a bit arts about, The Advertiser, Friday).
The V8 decision had nothing to do with profits to the state, of which there were many, but much to do with old Adelaide toffs.
A dear friend associated with these toffs calls every year to remind my husband, an avid motorsport enthusiast, that “Elizabeth has come to the city”.
This is said only half tongue in cheek. I say let’s cancel the State Opera.
TINA VEREY, Littlehampton
Child-like grip
IT’S halftime and your team is well ahead. Do you declare them the winner and not bother to continue?
This is what Donald Trump and most of his supporters seem to believe should happen. Early votes and those on the day have him leading, so in the knowledge that mail-in votes will certainly favour Biden, he says stop counting because I’ve won.
It is just like his assertion that if they didn’t do so many tests, there would be fewer cases of COVID-19. He seems to have a childlike grasp on reality.
Let’s hope the US can be brought back to reality without bloodshed and hate.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood
US power
A PROPER outcome of the developing governing crisis in the US will depend on the due separation of power.
In particular, the separation of Donald Trump from the stuff.
M. F. HORTON, Clarence Park
Fuel for thought
IT was encouraging to read the editorial recognising the need to replace the current fuel-excise tax soon and reminding us of former premier Jay Weatherill’s proposals for a distance-based tax for heavy vehicles (“Electric dreams”, The Advertiser, Friday).
Australia remains down the table of the OECD rankings for total taxation as a percentage of the national cake.
This might suit some, but it leaves multiple areas of social need underfunded, and it limits the capacity of national and state governments to more fully support innovation, creativity, employment and above all the more rapid transition to a post-carbon and more inclusive economy and society.
STEWART SWEENEY, North Adelaide
Traffic jams
BEING 68, and never having had a driver’s licence, people tend to think I’m a bit odd and know nothing about traffic. While sitting on a stationary bus on North Terrace, I wonder why many motorists continue to clog the cultural boulevard in peak hour when lanes are restricted due to ongoing construction.
I don’t need a licence to know that there is more than one way to get from one side of the CBD to the other.
M. A. FIOLIC, Largs Bay
Petrol shortage
SATURDAY morning at about 11am my small Austin A35 classic car died in the middle of Main South Road while crossing from Sturt Road to the bottom of Shepherds Hill Road, and I managed to roll to level with the traffic light – not a good place to stop.
Within a minute a wonderful fellow ran up offering to push the car (uphill) to a safer spot a bit further up the road, which he duly did.
Shortly after, while waiting for the RAA service, another couple in a black SUV pulled up to check and persuaded me to accept a bottle of water. Very grateful.
A bit later a lovely lady, a Mini fan, stopped to check that I was OK and left after a chat.
Soon after, a pleasant RAA man arrived and confirmed my suspicion that I was out of fuel, despite the fuel gauge showing a quarter full. Fuel added and problem fixed, and he followed me up to Blackwood to make sure that I made it. Great service.
A huge thank you to all those people. It is reassuring to learn that there are still some great people around.
Incidentally the car’s rego number “RONS 80” is a lie – I’m 91!
RON BURCHETT, Blackwood
Aussie nuts
I NOTE Bega has won the logo battle for peanut butter.
Now, to win me, all they need to do is use all Aussie peanuts.
NORM BENNETT. Ceduna
Packed airport
WHILE the opening up of the Victorian borders will please some, there may be a big problem at the Adelaide Airport.
At the moment all passengers arriving at the airport on flights from other states have to go via a COVID-19 checkpoint. This can cause big delays when several fights arrive a close intervals.
With the significant increase in flights, due to opening up of borders, this will cause massive problems.
My suggestion is that all gates with arrivals from all destinations other than Melbourne are fully opened without checkpoints.
If Victoria continues to show it’s not a risk any more then that will change.
Obviously all international flights and passengers must be quarantined. But the domestic terminal must be fully open once flight numbers get back to near normal.
DAVID BISHOP, South Plympton
Victorian case
SEVERAL days ago we were informed of South Australia’s 519th COVID-19 case, a nurse who had gone to work in ­Victoria and contracted the ­illness there.
She returned to quarantine and was found to be still positive for the virus on testing. It was “complicated”, “may not be a new case”, we learnt.
A few days later Victoria celebrated 14 days free of zero new cases.
But our 519th case was surely Victoria’s latest. Yet such a misleading claim, of zero cases, will now lead to free travel from Victoria without the need to quarantine.
Have I missed something?
Yes, it would be nice to read the figures for the state in which this illness is acquired, rather than the state where it is discovered.
ROBERT BLACK, Glen Osmond
Trees axed
I LIVE in Strathalbyn and love the place.
Full of rows of old large trees. A lot of them majestic old pines.
I know pines are not native and I get it when it comes to development and progress.
But I am sick and tired of every newly zoned and newly created development around this lovely town, all, and I mean all, pine trees, some as old as Strathalbyn itself get lopped, chopped and unceremoniously ripped out of the ground.
Even when they are not actually on any blocks or mooted roadways.
Example: Hampden Way. The latest huge chunk of once farm land to be seized for converting into cul-de-sacs and villa homes, has already had all pines cut down and even historic huge old red gums have been savagely de-limbed as heavy machinery rapes its way through.
No opposition from the council, no consultation with any locals. Just the roar of chainsaws.
At the end of the day a tree is a tree to birds. They care not what breed they are.
PAUL WILLIAMS, Strathalbyn
Fun pageant
A HUGE congratulations to the organisers of the National Pharmacies Christmas Pageant.
I had the privilege to attend and it was a wonderful event.
Yes, it was different – it had to be.
To all the naysayers out there, please try and find the spirit of Christmas.
You might just find it makes you feel better after a difficult year.
Merry Christmas to all.
LEONIE McLEOD, Glandore
Crushing loss
ON November 4, The Advertiser carried an article by Adella Beaini titled “Used cars with new car price tags” which reported that the tight supply of new cars had sent used-car prices soaring.
And that Holden Commodores were among the best performers on the used-car market.
So I am surprised to see on Saturday, in the article by Steve Rice “Crushing end for idiots who refused to obey road rules”, that cars valued up to $8000 were crushed.
And the car in the photo by Tom Huntley is a Holden Commodore.
Surely the cars could have been auctioned to yield more money for the State Government, or a charity, than what they are worth as scrap metal.
This would still make the point that the offending driver had lost the car.
The VE series that was in the photo is the same as the two cars in the current “speeders come out of nowhere campaign” reported on back on June 13 (“Shocking ad to curb shocking toll”, The Advertiser).
Fortunately the VE had a long production run.
Maybe the Commodore, and the Volvo also featured, the could have been used to make another TV ad and then crushed.
TIM COX, Glenside
SACE inquiry
KYM, whatever the outcome of any inquiry conducted by SACE into the psychology exam cancellation, it will not change the students’ results (“Exam inquiry”, The Advertiser, Friday).
It is not only students and parents who find this time of the year stressful.
Teachers who have worked all year to assist and prepare students are also stressed.
However, if the students have followed their teachers’ advice and applied themselves throughout the year, then the exam would have confirmed their efforts and they would have been rewarded appropriately.
Maybe in the case of exams, we need to go back to pen and paper.
DOMENICA CAVUOTO, Klemzig
Top victory
CAN we please get the Argentinian rugby team fast tracked to becoming Aussie citizens so we can beat the All Blacks.
BOB HENDERSON, Kidman Park
The latest cartoons from Jos Valdman
Word count: 7411
