DISTINGUISHED AND CONSPICUOUS (NO STATE) COMMENDATION FOR GALLANTRY AUSTRALIAN ARMY Corporal Mitchell Jon Howden, For acts of gallantry in action while a Section Commander in the Quick Reaction Force Platoon, Task Group Taji X, Iraq on 11 March 2020.
BAR TO THE DISTINGUISHED SERVICE MEDAL AUSTRALIAN ARMY Lieutenant Colonel S, For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as a Task Group Commander on Operation OKRA from December 2019 to July 2020.
DISTINGUISHED SERVICE MEDAL AUSTRALIAN ARMY Colonel Nicholas James Foxall AM, For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as Commander Task Group Taji X in the period November 2019 to March 2020.
COMMENDATION FOR DISTINGUISHED SERVICE AUSTRALIAN ARMY Corporal B, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a Team Commander.
Lieutenant Colonel Meegan Bernadette Olding, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike conditions as the Acting Chief Strategy and Plans Division, Coalition Joint Plans in the Combined Joint Task Force Headquarters of Operation Inherent Resolve from November 2019 to September 2020.
Captain P, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a platoon commander.
Lieutenant Colonel Anna Reinhardt, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Senior Human Resources Adviser to the Ministry of Interior Affairs while force assigned to Operation HIGHROAD from 24th November 2018 to 8th September 2019, in Kabul, Afghanistan.
BAR TO THE CONSPICUOUS SERVICE CROSS ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY Commander Phillipa Hay CSC RAN, For outstanding achievement in the field of Maritime Planning and Operational Command.
Captain Phillip Andrew Henry CSC RAN, For outstanding achievement as Director Navy Recruiting Retention and Transition.
CONSPICUOUS SERVICE CROSS ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY Commander Gavin Ashley Milkins RAN, For outstanding achievement as the Medical Head of Department and Senior Health Officer, HMAS Adelaide.
Lieutenant Commander Ashleigh Beth Payne RAN, For outstanding achievement as Commanding Officer HMAS Bathurst.
Commander Moses Raudino RAN, For outstanding achievement in the field of Navy training.
Commander Chloe Ryan RAN, For outstanding achievement as a Navy Medical Officer during the national response to the coronavirus pandemic emergency.
Chief Petty Officer Benjamin Ashley Smith, For outstanding achievement during the introduction into service of the Hobart Class Destroyers.
Commander Eloise Adele Twine RAN, For outstanding achievement in the field of electronic warfare capability development.
Commander Darren White RAN, For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgment and leadership as Commanding Officer HMAS Sheean, on operations from December 2017 to December 2019.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY Colonel Justin John Alexander, For outstanding devotion to duty in provision of education services at Australian Defence Force Academy.
Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Lawrence Anderson, For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgment and dedication as the Commanding Officer of the 1st Signal Regiment.
Lieutenant Colonel Stuart James Baldwinson, For outstanding devotion to duty as the Commanding Officer/Chief Instructor of the Army School of Health.
Lieutenant Colonel Gregory Richard Brown NSC, For outstanding achievement as the Officer-In-Charge of the Health Certification Team of the 3rd Health Support Battalion.
Lieutenant Colonel Gregory John Colton DSM, For outstanding achievement as Staff Officer Grade One Professional Military Education – Army.
Brigadier Michael Edward Garraway AM, For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgment and dedication as the Commander of Joint Task Force 1110, Operation BUSH FIRES ASSIST 2019-2020 and as Commander of Joint Task Group 629.1, Operation COVID-19 ASSIST.
Colonel Michael Joseph Hose, For outstanding achievement in satellite communications development for Australia and the ADF.
Colonel James Guthrie Hunter, For outstanding achievement as the inaugural Director Force Structure Plan Directorate, orchestrating the delivery of the first quadrennial Defence capability assessment process.
Colonel James Alan Matchett, For outstanding achievement in assuring the continual generation of Australian Defence Force capability through ab-initio recruitment.
Brigadier Christopher John Mills AM, For outstanding achievement as the Director General Force Options and Plans through the application of exceptional skill, judgment and dedication in the planning and delivery of the 2020 Defence Force Structure Plan.
Lieutenant Colonel Robyn Kristine O'Donnell, For outstanding achievement as the Chief Legal Officer, Army Headquarters.
Lieutenant Colonel Ross William Thomas, For outstanding devotion to duty as the Staff Officer Grade One – Program Sustainment in Logistics Branch, Army Headquarters.
Brigadier Robert John Watson, For outstanding achievement in the development and implementation of a Joint defensive cyberspace operations capability for the ADF.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE Flight Sergeant Sean Alan Bell CSM, For outstanding achievement in F-35A Joint Strike Fighter hardware systems fleet management; and in the establishment and development of mission data products.
Squadron Leader Paul Frederick Bowes, For outstanding achievement in air-to-surface combat support integration training at No.4 Squadron for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Group Captain Edwin Jamie Boyd, For outstanding achievement in organisational reform and aviation training capability sustainment for the Australian Defence Force.
Squadron Leader Steven Henry Brady, For outstanding achievement in establishing the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter mission data development capability for the ADF.
Wing Commander Timothy Cantrill, For outstanding achievement in military aircraft type certification as Engineering Manager of Project Air 8000 Phase 2 acquiring the C 27J Spartan transport aircraft.
Flight Sergeant Jenny Leigh Dillon CSM, For outstanding devotion to duty in medical administration for the ADF.
Squadron Leader Michael Jeffrey Dorman, For outstanding devotion to duty to the ADF in aviation risk management in complex operating environments.
Wing Commander Robert Michael Gill, For outstanding achievement in knowledge systems development, operations planning, and improved allied interoperability for Headquarters Joint Operations Command.
Flight Lieutenant Simon John Hall, For outstanding achievement in support of complex historic honours and awards research and outcomes, and administration of RAAF honours and decorations.
Flight Lieutenant Aaron James Hardman, For outstanding achievement in aerospace engineering, project management, and electronic warfare capability development for the ADF.
Group Captain Paul Howard Jarvis, For outstanding achievement in Air Combat and Airborne Electronic Attack capability development for the ADF.
Air Commodore David John Paddison, For outstanding devotion to duty in combat capability development for the ADF.
Wing Commander Collette Kristin Richards, For outstanding devotion to duty in aviation medicine capability development and delivery for the RAAF.
Air Commodore Benjamin John Sleeman DSM, For outstanding achievement in non-warlike operations whilst deployed as Director Combined Air and Space Operations Centre, United States Air Force Central Command.
Flight Lieutenant Andrew Luke Willersdorf, For outstanding achievement in capability development of the C-27J Spartan at No.35 Squadron for the RAAF.
CSM ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY Lieutenant Commander Peter Edward Chapman RAN, For meritorious achievement in the field of Maritime Logistics Officer Workgroup Management.
Lieutenant Commander Sarah Maree Eddes RAN, For meritorious achievement as the Regional Manager of the Royal Australian Navy Fleet Support Unit North.
Chief Petty Officer Matthew Alan Graham, For meritorious achievement in the application of exceptional skills and judgement as the Senior Technical Officer of HMAS Yarra.
Chief Petty Officer Kerrin James Lyon, For meritorious devotion to duty as the Fleet Medical Submariner within Sea Training Unit – Submarines.
Commander Nicole Helen Mann RAN, For outstanding achievement as the Deputy Director of the Navy People Career Management Agency.
Commander Dylan William Phillips RAN, For outstanding achievement as the Commanding Officer of HMAS Toowoomba on Operation MANITOU from April to June 2020.
Leading Seaman Brendan Michael Robinson, For meritorious achievement in the field of Signals Intelligence engineering support.
Lieutenant Jacqueline Rushford RAN, For meritorious achievement as the Navigating Officer of HMA Ships Glenelg and Childers.
Lieutenant Commander Trevor Francis Teale RAN, For meritorious devotion to duty as the Officer in Charge of Submarine Support Group.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY Warrant Officer Class Two B, For meritorious devotion to duty as a Physical Training Instructor and Human Performance Optimisation Program leader within Special Operations Command.
Warrant Officer Class One Peter Wayne Brine, For meritorious achievement in movements support for Australian Defence Force operations, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Forum.
Lance Corporal Michael Alan Coulson, For meritorious devotion to duty as the Australian Defence Force Liaison Officer to the National Heavy Vehicle Regulator.
Warrant Officer Class Two Karle Clyde Engstrom, For meritorious devotion to duty as the as the Squadron Sergeant Major of C Squadron, 2nd Cavalry Regiment from 2018 to 2020.
Corporal Pierce Jordan Halliday, For meritorious achievement as the Landing Craft Maintenance Section Commander at 35 Water Transport Squadron, 10th Force Support Battalion.
Warrant Officer Class Two Leigh Gary Hedger, For meritorious achievement as the Regimental Technical Adjutant of the 3rd Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment, and Mechanised Warrant Officer of the 6th Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment.
Colonel Robert Barton Lording, For meritorious devotion to duty as Deputy Commander and Acting Commander 8th Brigade (Training) from January 2018 to December 2019.
Major Benjamin Ian McCaskill, For meritorious devotion to duty as the Staff Officer Grade Two Force Modernisation, Headquarters Forces Command and through the introduction into service of Project LAND 121 into Forces Command.
Sergeant Jarrad Robert Mildrum, For meritorious devotion to duty as the Electronic Countermeasures Sergeant within the Land Countermeasures Reprogramming Cell at Army Headquarters.
Lance Corporal N, For meritorious devotion to duty in the Special Air Service Regiment, Special Operations Command.
Private Warwick Edward Naggs, For meritorious achievement as Acting Troop Leader Surveillance Troop, 2nd/14th Light Horse Regiment (Qld Mounted Infantry).
Major Michael Anthony Sipple, For meritorious achievement as Officer Commanding and Senior Project Engineer at 19th Chief Engineer Works.
Lieutenant Colonel Adam Wayne Sparkes, For meritorious achievement as Staff Officer Grade One Land Intelligence, Systems and Integration Branch, Army Headquarters.
Major Carolyn Jean Wood, For meritorious achievement in the application of authentic leadership as Officer Commanding, Specialist and Command Support Wing, Army School of Ordnance, and collaborative management through uncertainty during 2020 Victorian bushfire crisis.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE Squadron Leader Dianne Beverley Bell, For meritorious achievement in international engagement for the RAAF.
Group Captain Paul Anthony Bowler, For meritorious achievement in operational planning and execution for the ADF.
Wing Commander Damien Walter Fairhurst, For meritorious achievement as the Commander of Task Unit 630.1 on Operation ACCORDION from October 2019 to June 2020. Flight Sergeant Lorraine Isabel Morley, For devotion to duty in training administration and development in the Air Warfare Centre for the RAAF.
Word count: 1672
