French renewable energy developer Neoen on Thursday revealed it had been awarded a contract to build the 300MW battery in Geelong to help drive down Victorian power bills, protect the grid from disturbances and encourage further renewable energy projects.
Under the latest plans, the Victorian Big Battery would be located 14km northwest of the CBD in Moorabool, on land adjacent to the Moorabool Terminal Station – allowing it to directly connect to the Victorian grid.
Victorian Big Battery artist's impression
The project is expected to help drive down Victorian power bills, protect the grid from disturbances, encourage further renewable energy projects and help the state move away from coal power stations.
The project will also double the size of the 150MW ‘Tesla Big Battery’ in Hornsdale, which is credited with saving South Australians $150 million from power bills in two years of operation at 100MW capacity.
While Neoen would not reveal the price of the project on Thursday, recent planning documents suggest it ill cost about $200 million.
The State Government on Thursday revealed Neoen had been successful in its bid to win the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) contract to provide an automatic response in the event of an unexpected network outage.
“The big battery will help protect our network in summer, create jobs and drive down energy prices – as well as supporting our economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic,” Ms D‘Ambrosio said.
“By securing one of the biggest batteries in the world, Victoria is taking a decisive step away from coal-fired power and embracing new technologies that will unlock more renewable energy than ever before.”
Environment Victoria chief executive Jono La Nauze was quick to celebrate the project announcement on Thursday.
“At 300 megawatts, it’s twice the size of the Tesla big battery in South Australia. This is a game-changer for Victoria’s transition from old coal-burning power stations to clean energy,” Mr La Nauze said.
“It’s great to see the Andrews government preparing for the closure of Victoria’s ageing coal power stations, which are the state’s biggest climate polluters and have becoming increasingly unreliable in summer months.”
Neoen Australia managing director Louis de Sambucy revealed the company would again work with AusNet and tech billionaire Elon Musk’s Tesla to build the Battery Energy Storage Facility.
“We are delighted to have won the SIPS contract and would like to thank AEMO and the Victorian Government for placing their trust in us,” Mr de Sambucy said. “We are looking forward to working once again with Tesla and AusNet to deliver this world-leading battery storage facility over the coming months.”
“We are extremely proud to be launching a project of this scale and innovation in support of Victoria’s clean energy transition.”
The Victorian Big Battery is expected to create more than 85 local jobs and deliver over $200 million in investment into the Geelong region, and is expected to be operational by the end of 2021.
But, that State Opposition was not celebrating on Thursday, claiming the big battery should be built in Mortlake instead of Moorabool.
The Opposition claimed almost a quarter of energy produced in the ‘renewable energy production zone’ in the state’s west would be lost in transmission to the Moorabool battery.
“What we don’t support is building such batteries in areas that make neither environmental nor economic sense,” Shadow Minister for Energy and Renewables Ryan Smith said.
In April the Geelong Advertiser revealed Neoen had submitted a planning application to the City of Greater Geelong to build a $300 million, 600MW Victorian Big Battery at the Moorabool site.
Twitter follow Harrison Tippet
Word count: 576
