Scott Morrison told the Biden climate summit last month that Australia was deploying renewable energy 10 times faster than the global average per person and had the highest uptake of rooftop solar in the world. This is borne out in the ESB discussion paper, which says investments are exceeding what was seen as the ambitious “step change” scenario it outlined as recently as last year.
The speed of the rollout is being encouraged and complicated by state governments setting ever more ambitious targets to cut greenhouse gas emissions independent of the federal government. Victoria has announced a target to cut greenhouse gas emissions by between 45 per cent and 50 per cent on 2005 levels by 2030. South Australia has a target of 50 per cent or more compared with the national target of 26 per cent to 28 per cent. The Australian Energy Council warns that go-it-alone approaches by states are less efficient and less likely to achieve reductions at lowest cost to households and the economy. As states lift their ambition, they are pushing the federal government to take responsibility for making sure the national market continues to function.
One big impact from the speed of the rollout of intermittent wind and solar generation is that the economics of existing coal-fired plants are being shot to pieces. This is because wind and solar can generate and dispatch cheap electricity when the wind is blowing and the sun is shining but coal or other forms of on-demand power must be there to back things up when they aren’t. The more wind and solar generation there is in the system, the less room there is for coal to make money — but it must still be ready to jump in with guaranteed electricity if required. Aside from coal, there are other ways to back up the grid, including gas, hydro-electricity or, for very short durations, batteries.
Left unchecked, existing fossil fuel generators will probably become uneconomic and will be forced to close ahead of their planned retirement dates, which could result in higher prices and less reliability for consumers. The experience from Texas in the US winter was that leaving things purely to the market could result in spectacular price spikes and blackouts. The experience from Germany is that wishful thinking can have costly consequences. Retired coal-fired plants had to be brought quickly back into production to maintain supplies of electricity as renewable supplies failed in winter. In Australia, the ESB is considering how to maintain security of supply while a bigger transformation of the market takes place.
One option is for generators to be paid to be available whether they dispatch electricity or not. The capacity payments would not be confined to existing coal-fired generators and the cost would be borne by electricity retailers, who would pass it on to customers. A capacity market operates in Britain where, in times of oversupply, renewable energy projects also are paid not to produce power. Despite the inefficiencies, the ESB plan for capacity payments is supported by Energy Minister Angus Taylor but has been criticised by renewable energy purists as a slowing of the decarbonisation process. Mr Taylor has a blunt response: “Fanatics who think one option is the entire solution for the energy system have been wrong in the past and they will be wrong again in the future.”
Capacity payments inevitably involve paying for electricity that is produced but not used, which is wasteful of electricity and greenhouse gas emissions. But they must be seen as an essential cost of the renewable transition and a subsidy that must be factored into the total cost of wind and solar.
Mr Taylor says capacity payments for fossil fuels are not about ideology but a pragmatic focus on solutions in relation to the transition. Less ideology and more co-operation are what is needed. So is a recognition that Australia is delivering one of the most ambitious re-engineerings of electricity supply to cut greenhouse gases anywhere the world.
Word count: 658
