Tango Energy is entering the Queensland and South Australia markets this year after launching in NSW in the middle of last year.
CEO Domenic Capomolla said the growing company would continue to base its customer service operations in the Federal Mills business precinct in North Geelong, where it was one of the earliest tenants.
“We have over 50-full-time jobs there .., and we have got space to grow to 100 seats,” Mr Capomolla said.
“Geelong folks will be servicing the entire Australian market.”
Mr Capomolla said Geelong and southwest Victoria, where Pacific Hydro operates a handful of wind farms, were a growing strong hold for Tango Energy.
“A few years ago we had a few thousand customers, today we have 100,000 and most of those are in Victoria and the majority of those are in Geelong and the western region,” he said.
By the middle of this year, the company is set to trial a new “energy sharing community” offering in Geelong and the Surf Coast.
The concept involves selling excess solar energy back into the market or to a neighbour.
“We take care of the installation of the solar and the battery, we take care of all the software, and all of the bits and pieces to have a financial exchange of energy,” Mr Capomolla said,
“You get the financial equivalent of selling to your neighbour and other people around the region, if you are not selling it back to the grid.”
He said the trial would create energy sharing communities.
“You are generating and keeping that energy within that community and if you have more over again, you will sell it back into the marketplace and reduce your energy bill,” he said.
The trial is set to start in the next three to four months.
Mr Capomolla said because Tango Energy was 100 per cent owned by a renewable energy generator, its customers could help make a difference.
He said the company agreed with the Federal Government that gas, a much better carbon emitter than coal-generated power, was an appropriate transition fuel until the grid could be completely powered by renewables,
“We are saying to customers, don’t just wait for the government, you can lead the charge by signing up to someone like Tango, who supports renewable energy - and we build wind farms, he said.
“And with this energy sharing community that we are starting to develop later this year, will also move consumers in the direction.”
Word count: 394
