While the deal was agreed to this week by Sydney Airport’s board, Sims has an opportunity to lay out some terms for his sign off, to prevent any abuse of market power by airport owners.
While Qantas, as the major customer of Australian airports, has the most to lose, it is airline customers – the public – who will be hit if there were to be any use of market power to put up airport fees or exert other powers over customers.
No one is saying that the range of institutional investors owning airports will overtly gang up to raise landing fees, but this week’s deal sees a further consolidation of airport ownership.
Sydney Airport stood out as the one major listed airport in the wake of a string of privatisations over previous decades.
This deal also represents another leap forward for the $900bn industry super fund movement which now has stakes in most of the major airports in one form or another.
The buyout for Australia’s busiest airport will go down as a milestone in the history of the increasingly powerful industry super fund sector, which is fast running out of big new deals in Australia.
Led by the $150bn IFM Investors, an investment fund owned by 23 industry funds, the alliance also includes Australia’s largest super fund, the $240bn AustralianSuper, and Queensland-based QSuper, which has assets of $117bn.
The funds linked up with Global Infrastructure Partners of the US to pull off the deal.
Another industry fund, the $100bn UniSuper, the biggest single shareholder in Sydney Airport with a stake of 15 per cent, will remain as a key shareholder in the airport as its moves into private hands.
The ACCC notes IFM’s infrastructure investment fund has holdings in nine airports in Australia. These are Melbourne (25.2 per cent), Brisbane (20 per cent), Adelaide (12.8 per cent), Darwin (77.4 per cent), Perth (3.2 per cent), Alice Springs and Tennant Creek (77.4 per cent), Launceston (22.7 per cent) and Parafield in South Australia (12.8 per cent).
AustralianSuper has a 5.25 per cent stake in Perth Airport. QSuper has investments in airports in London’s Heathrow, Edinburgh and Brisbane.
UniSuper was not part of the bid but its decision to support the deal and not sell its stake was a critical element in its success. As well as its 15 per cent stake in Sydney Airport, it has a 6.98 per cent stake in Brisbane Airport and 49 per cent of Adelaide Airport.
In a letter to the alliance in October, the ACCC said it was looking at the “cross ownership between multiple airports and how this acquisition may impact on those dynamics.”
It was also looking at “competition in the provision of services for airlines, passengers and other users of airport services”.
Euromoney said the deal confirmed “the outsized power of Australia’s superannuation fund sector”. It noted that at $3.3 trillion, the sector was “one of the largest institutional asset pools in the world”.
“Its scale is out of step with the economy – double the national GDP, for example, and well over the $2.44 trillion entire market capitalisation of the ASX.”
More specifically, the deal is another sign of the firepower of industry funds, which overtook the retail super fund sector years ago, and their role in the investment landscape.
Not only is the influence of the industry funds rising – the latest statistics from APRA show there was $927bn in industry super funds at the end of June compared to $688bn in retail funds, but the assets in the industry fund sector are concentrated in fewer hands, 33 vs 93 in retail.
This makes the average size of an industry fund $28bn compared to $7.4bn for the average retail fund, which gives them more power.
But it also puts them under increasing pressure to find sizeable, stable, long-term assets to invest in, particularly in the limited market in Australia.
The Sydney Airport deal is was a long way from the controversy of 15 years ago when IFM’s then chief executive, Garry Weaven, made a contested bid for listed renewable energy company Pacific Hydro.
That bid attracted much attention with some observers aghast that an industry fund could be involved in a sharemarket buyout, predicting all sorts of fearful outcomes from “union controlled” capitalism.
What actually followed was a series of more private investments with super funds buying stakes in airports and other assets as they were privatised.
The next big deal came in 2016 when Canberra declared that a Chinese bidder and a Hong Kong company were unsuitable to buy a 50 per cent stake in NSW electricity company Ausgrid.
AustralianSuper and IFM jumped at the chance to pick up the stake in the asset for $16bn. The pair also teamed up to a buy a stake in NSW Ports.
While these were private deals with the funds buying assets from state governments, AustralianSuper has ventured into on-market takeovers in recent years.
In 2018 it launched a $4.1bn bid for hospital owner Healthscope as part of a consortium with Singapore’s GIC led by private equity group BGH Capital. That deal didn’t go ahead.
It teamed up later that year with BGH to bid for listed education company Navitas, a deal which was finalised in 2019.
Meanwhile, the industry funds continue to scour the globe for new big ticket infrastructure deals.
Further consolidation of super funds is well underway. APRA has been pushing for more consolidation of the industry for years, particularly at the bottom end.
Deanne Stewart, the CEO of the country’s second largest fund, the $150bn Aware Super – formed from a merger in 2020 of VicSuper and First State Super – predicted that the industry would eventually be dominated by half a dozen mega funds.
Aware Super itself has been a quiet owner of Bankstown Airport in Sydney’s west.
First State Super bought airports at Bankstown and Camden in 2015 for just over $200m.
After developing an industrial park around Bankstown Airport, Aware now estimates that it is worth around $1bn, although it has no intention to sell.
The Sydney Airport megadeal is a sign of the times of the increasing power of the industry funds.
Sims has to carefully consider how his competition powers need to come into play in a key infrastructure sector.
Word count: 1014
