The first week was a masterclass in pushing political agendas and celebrity profiles mixed with the climate hypocrisy of multiple arrivals by corporate jet in the name of slashing emissions.
Behind the scenes negotiations on the substantive communique have been held back by resistance from China and Russia.
The most substantial progress appears to have come from the phalanx of business figures – ­including some of Australia’s most influential corporate players – who have flocked to the conference seeking green energy deals that they believe will be backed by government policies and the ­climate change mandates of the big financial institutions.
Scott Morrison visited COP26 for two days last week and his keynote delivery of Australia’s new 2050 net-zero position was to a near-empty conference room full of television cameras. Australia was then missing from the other big environmental pushes; signing up to cut methane gas or a commitment to end coalmining.
Claims that Australia would face condemnation at COP26 for refusing to raise its 2030 emissions targets have proven overblown. Instead, India’s decision to delay its net-zero commitment until 2070 has drawn the ire of ­environmentalists.
That hasn’t stopped the Morrison government’s opponents from using the global spotlight to attack it.
Last week, Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young turned up at Australia’s corner in the ­kilometres-long series of pavilions: a tiny patch of corporate marketing – which has not a kangaroo or Indigenous element in sight – where a coffee machine draws in pro-nuclear activists handing out bananas to condemn the government. “There is a lot of goodwill here but sadly Australia is not part of it,’’ she said.
Hanson-Young posted: “Scott Morrison and Angus Taylor doing the bidding of the fossil fuel industry here at Glasgow” with a picture of a display showing Santos’s $220m transition plans for Moomba, north of Adelaide, to make hydrogen from gas and bury carbon emissions in empty ­reservoirs.
At the weekend after climate change protests in Glasgow, Hanson-Young posted a selfie with Swedish child activist Greta Thunberg in the background.
With the world leaders who came in their hundreds in the first days of the conference making their speeches in the hectares of interlinked conference centres on the banks of the Clyde having largely departed, the conference has been taken over by super models, actors and ­astronauts.
Actor Leonardo DiCaprio and model Lily Cole have appeared as well as astronauts Ron Garan and Nicole Stott.
Last week, Thunberg walked the halls trying to look incognito behind a beanie and scarf before her big demonstration.
Among the phalanx of Australian business figures, Fortescue’s Andrew Forrest has been the most active, using the summit to condense six months of travel into two weeks of back-to-back meetings: Michael Bloomberg one day, Prince Charles the next.
Forrest is converting his iron ore operations to hydrogen but using green renewable energy. He has been the highest-profile industrialist here, signing deals from the US to UK to Papua New Guinea and sorting 20 hubs to make good his plans of manufacturing 15 million tonnes of hydrogen a year from renewable sources and turn Gladstone, Queensland, into a world-leading hydrogen plant.
Protests took place in Glasgow, where the COP26 summit is being held, and across the world on Saturday as people across the planet demanded bolder action to tackle global warming. David Doyle has more.
Before COP26, Forrest pulled Malcolm Turnbull into his tent as chair of a lobby group Green ­Hydrogen Organisation, based out of Geneva with a Norwegian diplomat as chief executive and Conservative peer Lord Adair Turner and Hyundai president Youngcho Chi on the board.
Turnbull strayed off-message at the summit when he couldn’t resist sniping at Morrison for being a “liar” on the submarine stoush when he was meant to promote using renewables for green hydrogen production and attack hydrogen manufacture using fossil fuels.
Other prominent projects included the $10bn Star of the South offshore wind farm project in Victoria’s Gippsland, to go before parliament in December.
Santos and Woodside have used COP26 to announce big carbon capture projects, achieved on the back of millions of dollars of carbon credits from Canberra.
Australian start-up MCI won the summit’s best pitch for using carbon in a suite of building products, including cement and plaster board. Another, Lavo Australia, is about to launch a consumer-sized hydrogen electrolyser that stores rooftop solar power, providing up to two days of domestic use with an integrated hybrid hydrogen battery.
Rio Tinto chair Simon Thompson, Santos chief Kevin Gallagher and Macquarie Group’s Shemara Wikramanayake attended Morrison’s breakfast last Monday, joined by bosses of “green” companies such as David Griffin of Sun Cable, Julie Shuttleworth of Fortescue Future Industries, Stephen Bell from of Qenos, Sophia Hamblin Wang of Mineral ­Carbonation International and Michael Hannibal of Star of the South as well as leaders of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, Austrade and Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
Gallagher said companies must adapt and change their energy mix “or die’’, with the big flow of investment money turning away from coal, oil and gas.
Word count: 817
