Helen Taylor told the School Strike 4 Climate her son, Leif Justham, desperately wanted to educate others about environmental issues.
Mr Justham, 21, was riding across the Nullarbor Plain when he was struck and killed by a truck 70km west of Caiguna in April. The driver has been charged with causing death by dangerous driving.
Ms Taylor told more than 1000 people who attended the strike, including many children and teenagers, that her son was frustrated by the government’s “lack of response” to the climate emergency.
She said Mr Justham, who worked as a tree-planter, reduced his footprint wherever he could by riding his bike, recycling, cleaning up beaches and volunteering in revegetation projects.
“Leif spent time learning about the issues we face as a planet and the steps everyone can take to help protect our future,” she said.
“He loved adventure and desperately wanted to educate others and share his passion.”
Ms Taylor said her son had embarked on an “epic journey” to spread a message around climate change.
“His mission was to ride solo and unsupported around this beautiful, vast continent, raising awareness about climate change and about our collective power for change,” she said.
Mr Justham encouraged everyone he met to switch banks away from “dirty” investors, opt for superannuation funds that don’t invest in fossil fuels and choose cleaner petrol.
An emotional Ms Taylor said she was moved to speak at the rally to ensure her son’s story lives on.
“At just 21 years old, Leif is gone and nothing will bring him back,” she said.
“I’m here to make sure that his message reaches far and wide and that he continues to inspire change.”
Following the strike, at Victoria Square, protesters marched to Parliament House and back.
Frustrated students to unite on climate change
Frustrated and fearful school students say they hope to find solace and solidarity at today’s School Strike 4 Climate – the first to be held since COVID-19 hit.
Organisers are hoping up to 3000 students and others will attend the rally in Victoria Square, but the Education Minister has told them they shouldn’t be skipping school.
Teen activist Audrey Mason-Hyde feels “pretty unhappy” about the state of affairs, especially federal government policies and fossil fuel subsidies.
“We want to see more money being put into our futures and our kids’ futures, for a sustainable and renewable future in this country rather than gas and oil projects, which they’re currently putting money into and putting even more into as of the federal budget,” the 15-year-old from Unley said.
Audrey, a Year 11 Glenunga International High School student, is one of the organisers of the Adelaide arm of the national activist movement behind, meeting weekly to plan events and lobby decision-makers.
“All of us came from a place of not feeling like we could make change before we were in this group, and feeling helpless in a lot of ways,” Audrey said.
“Being part of a group that does do things, and is a community, that in itself is a triumph.”
Tom Webster, 16, of Beulah Park, attends Eyensbury College and wants the government to “stop throwing taxpayer dollars at fossil fuels” and invest in renewables instead.
“We know over time that we will start shifting the public’s minds on these issues,” he said.
“And it’s when we shift enough minds that you truly see change, because when people change their minds and they hit the polls, they will tell the government what they want.”
Both students said most schools supported climate action and student protest. “They agree that the science is unmistakeable and as young people, it is important that we take on the issues we are passionate about in order to become better global citizens,” Audrey said.
But Education Minister John Gardner said the students should be at school.
”Each day spent in school is an opportunity to enhance a student’s learning; each day absent represents missed curriculum and lost opportunity for learning,” he said.
“Every student has a right to engage in political activities, but in my view it would be more meaningful for students who take part in a protest such as this to do so out of school hours, in the students’ own time.”
The Education Department said schools would “follow their normal processes for unexplained absences of students and will respond to any parent inquiries at the local level”.
Catholic Education SA said: “Each individual school will make its own decision about whether or not they will encourage students to attend the rally.”
“Catholic schools have a strong focus on ecology and encourage students to care for God’s creation in practical ways that have a real impact,” Assistant Director Monica Conway said.
“For this reason, many of our students are passionate about taking a stand on climate change and the need for sustainable practices in our schools, workplaces and homes.”
The Association of Independent Schools of SA also said it was a matter for individual schools.
Strike action will take place in capital cities, regional centres and country towns across the nation.
The organisers are the School Strike 4 Climate network, with support from First Nations communities, unions, parents, and individuals.
They want the Morrison Government to stop funding gas and coal projects with taxpayers money and instead invest in clean renewable energy, secure jobs, and First Nations solutions.
National spokeswoman Natasha Abhayawickrama, 16 from Tara Anglican School for Girls in Sydney, said the Federal Government appeared to be “far more concerned with lining the already-bursting pockets of multinational gas companies” than protecting the climate, land, and water.
“Their money-making agenda – only satiable at the expense of vulnerable Australians’ wellbeing and prosperity – are fuelling the climate crisis … the same crisis that is devastating our natural resources, destroying our health, and creating very few jobs for our population,” she said.
“So on May 21, together with tens of thousands of my fellow let-down Australians, I am striking from school to tell the Morrison government that they must stop throwing Aussie cash at gas. If Morrison cares about our collective future, he will make it happen.”
School Strike 4 Climate is at Victoria Square on Friday May 21, from 11am.
Word count: 995
