The charging points will be coupled with an electronic billboard, with the project trialling whether advertising can provide the finances for the free service.
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency will contribute $983,766 with charger company JOLT financing the rest.
Chargers will be installed in Port Adelaide Enfield, Marion, Campbelltown and Charles Sturt council areas.
“We’re thrilled to be launching in Adelaide to offer free charging for electric vehicle owners,” JOLT chief executive Doug McNamee said.
“Increasing the availability of charging infrastructure is a key piece of the puzzle for widespread adoption of EVs.
“We are excited to be partnering with innovative and forward-thinking councils, helping them transition to a zero-emission transport future.”
Motorists will be able to feed in 7 kilowatt hours of power – enough about 45km travel – over 15 minutes before having to pay for the energy.
All energy will be drawn from renewable sources.
Charles Sturt mayor and Local Government Association president Angela Evans welcomed the JOLT initiative.
“Electric vehicles are the way of the future,” she said.
ARENA chief executive Darren Miller said the project would help gauge consumer behaviour.
“The advertiser-funded model for EV charging is untested in Australia and JOLT’s project could lead to a viable business model to address charging availability and range anxiety and therefore lead to increased uptake of EVs,” he said.
“This project will test the appetite of customers living in metro areas who use their vehicles for shorter trips to charge their vehicles while they’re out shopping or at public events.
“The more we can learn about consumer behaviour now, the better prepared we will be for the broader uptake of EVs across Australia.”
Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said improving infrastructure was part of a plan “to help Australians choose which type of car they drive and support the uptake of hydrogen, electric and bio-fuelled vehicles”.
Electric vehicle ownership in Australia is low but growing rapidly, increasing by 56 per cent in the first five months of this year.
In the United Kingdom this week, the first EV-only refuelling station was opened. The 36-bay service station will be one of 100 established by a company called Gridserve.
The UK will ban sales of vehicles powered only by petrol or diesel by 2030.
The SA State Government has proposed a controversial road user charge on electric vehicles, with legislation on the tax to go to parliament.
Word count: 382
