Country Fire Authority acting assistant chief fire officer Ian Beswicke said the challenging fire fight meant the blaze had to be left to burn to a smoulder across four days as crews kept the area around the burning battery pack cool by spraying a water mist around it.
“Because of the battery packs the best process is to cool all the surrounds and let that battery pack burn out,” Mr Beswicke said.
“If you try and put it out (with water) it prolongs the process; when the water hits the hot metals the hydrogen and oxygen (in the water) split. It will sometimes slow the fire but it will never put it out because it keeps getting fed by the oxygen. That’s why we don’t put water or any other products onto it.”
A multi-agency probe into the cause of fire that includes Energy Safe Victoria, WorkSafe, engineering firm UGL, Tesla, Victoria Police, the Country Fire Authority and Fire Rescue Victoria is now under way.
“We have the technical experts from Tesla and UGL that can advise us about what was going on the site on (Friday),” Mr Beswicke said of the investigation.
It is unclear what caused the blaze and how long the investigation into it will last.
More than 30 fire trucks and support vehicles and about 150 firefighters from CFA and Fire Rescue Victoria responded to the blaze that broke out on Friday as the battery was undergoing testing.
Mr Beswicke said a handheld thermal camera and a drone with thermal imagining capability were used to monitor the fire that broke out in a battery pack the size of small shipping container.
The fire was brought under control on Monday afternoon after crews were able to open about 14 doors on the battery packs to assess the heat of the smouldering material inside.
A smaller number of firefighters, including Mr Beswicke, and fire trucks from CFA remained on the scene on Tuesday as a precaution, taking thermal temperature readings at two-hourly intervals.
Tesla responsible for the batteries and French renewable energy company Neoen responsible for the site did not respond to the Geelong Advertiser’s questions on Tuesday.
— Chad Van Estrop
How did Big Battery pack catch fire?
Fire investigators are preparing to probe the cause of a blaze that engulfed part of Victoria’s new $200m big battery.
Crews remained on the scene of the Moorabool blaze throughout Monday as the fire continued to burn after a Tesla Megapack caught fire during testing on Friday morning.
French renewable energy company Neoen, which operates the site, said the site was disconnected from the grid and there had been no impact to electricity supply.
“Investigation preparations are underway and physical inspections will commence once the CFA have completed their procedures,” managing director Louis de Sambucy said.
More than 130 firefighters were called to the scene on Friday to contain the blaze at the 13 tonne battery pack.
An advice message for residents in the area was issued following reports of a large amount of spoke.
The Environment Protection Authority confirmed it had deployed two mobile air quality monitors to a battery fire in Moorabool following requests from firefighters.
Ms de Sambucy said results showed there had been good air quality in the local community.
Country Fire Authority acting assistant chief fire officer Ian Beswicke praised the multi-agency response to the “challenging situation”.
“We’ve had lots of specialists on site … all that expertise helps us come up with some really good decisions about what we need to do to respond to these types of fires,” Mr Beswicke said.
“There was one battery pack on fire to start with, but it did spread to a second pack that was very close to it.
“The plan is that we keep it cool on the outside and protect the exposures so it doesn’t cause any issues for any of the other components in the power station.”
Victorian Liberal energy spokesman Brad Rowswell called on the state government to urgently investigate how the fire occurred.
“Batteries have a critical role to play in our renewable future but must be safe for communities, staff, and our power grid,” Mr Rowswell said.
A state government spokesman said on Friday that the state’s energy grid remained “safe and secure”.
Big Battery still smouldering on Sunday
A fire that engulfed part of the Victorian Big Battery continued to burn as authorities monitored the scene on ­Sunday.
Country Fire Authority and Fire Rescue Victoria crews ­remained at the Moorabool site across the weekend after a Tesla Megapack caught fire on Friday morning.
They were expected to stay on site until the fire burned ­itself out.
French renewable energy company Neoen confirmed the blaze broke out during ­testing.
The Victorian Big Battery, delivered in partnership with the state government and Elon Musk’s Tesla, will be a 300MW battery connected to the Victorian grid.
Once complete, the battery will be the largest in the southern hemisphere and double the size of the 150MW Tesla Big Battery in South Australia.
It will provide an automatic response if there is an unexpected network outage.
Neoen on Friday could not confirm the extent of the damage caused by the fire or if it would delay the project.
“Neoen and Tesla are working closely with emergency services on site to manage the situation,” Neoen Australia managing director Louis de Sambucy said.
“The site has been disconnected from the grid and there will be no impact to the electricity supply.”
CFA assistant chief fire officer Ian Beswicke said on Friday that more than 130 firefighters had been called to the scene.
A warning was issued to the wider community due fears of toxic smoke.
Specialist crews, including scientific officers, were called in to conduct atmospheric monitoring while drone units were deployed. A state government spokesman said the fire did not impact the state’s ­energy grid.
He said firefighters would investigate the cause of the blaze once it was fully ­extinguished.
Word count: 954
