Saul Griffith, an adviser to the Biden administration and founder of non-profits Rewiring America and Rewiring Australia, believes the early closures of AGL’s coal-fired plants is “good news for the environment, good news for families and should mean energy prices go down”.
The Wollongong-based entrepreneur, who has a PhD from MIT, was awarded a Macarthur “genius grant” and has founded and sold multiple companies as well as led projects for NASA and the US National Science Foundation, has laid out a manifesto for rapidly addressing climate change with renewable energy powering households at the core. He believes electric vehicles are a central part of that transition.
“We’re swimming in the world’s best solar and the world’s best wind, and we have really quite good hydro to back that up,” Griffith says.
“People don’t really get it yet but the biggest battery in the future will be the 20 million electric vehicles on Australia’s roads. And they will be able to power our homes and small businesses and our daily lives for days without the grid.
“The capacity of all of those batteries will be five or 10 days. They won’t be the only batteries in the system, but small amounts of using our vehicles for vehicle-to-grid, vehicle-to-home electricity absolutely makes the job easier. And we should be encouraging any policy that makes that happen.”
Griffith says that the “fear campaign” that coal plant closures will result in grid problems should be “called out as a lie”, and that the technical, as well as economic solutions are already here – something he says Mike Cannon-Brookes recognises with his joint takeover bid for AGL.
“This is actual capitalism at work from people who look to the future and understand where the prices of batteries are going,” he says.
“They understand that with a healthy mix of renewables, not reliant on any one thing, the grid stability issue goes away. Instead of point sources of failure, like one giant (coal) plant, you’re going to have a lot of batteries distributed around a lot of new generation. It’s much more likely to be more robust.”
The abundance of renewable energy continues to challenge the economics of fossil fuel-based power plants, with the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) reporting that negative or zero spot prices doubled over the year quarter to over 11 per cent nationally. In Victoria and South Australia, spot prices were negative more than a quarter of the time.
“Grid-scale solar, wind, hydro and rooftop solar PV continued to displace thermal generation, with black coal-fired generation falling to its lowest Q4 average since 1998, while gas generation declined to its lowest Q4 average since 2003,” the AEMO report concluded.
Rather than subsidise unprofitable coal generation, Griffith believes the government should rethink investments underpinning the energy network, accounting for the fact that millions of households will be effectively financing a nationwide distributed storage system via their private purchase of electric vehicles.
“We should redefine what public infrastructure means,” he says. “Historically, we give privileged capital to infrastructure projects, in the form of low interest government backed loans. And there’s absolutely no reason we shouldn’t be doing that same thing for this new public infrastructure.
“The government’s investment in the Snowy project – which is a big battery in effect – wouldn’t be as popular as spending the same amount of money underwriting people’s vehicle batteries, in exchange for having those vehicle batteries help stabilise the grid.”
Griffith doesn’t expect subsidies will be required for long to support widespread electrification of households under his plan but says Australia shouldn’t replicate the model of California where the majority of subsidies went to wealthy citizens buying expensive cars. Subsidies should short-lived, he says, as EVs are forecast to be cheaper than petrol vehicles by 2025. The payback will have a multiplier effect.
“Your household today sends $3000 to Saudi Arabia every year for oil. If you’re running your electric vehicle off your rooftop solar, you’ll only be spending $500 a year on the energy to drive and the other $2500 you’ll spend in the community.”
Word count: 665
