Centennial operates five thermal coal mines in NSW and has a critical debt deadline looming in October, when it needs to refinance loans worth up to $US400m.
Up to $US300m of bonds and $US90m of bank debt are believed to fall due then.
Centennial supplies thermal coal to the domestic and export markets and fuels about 30 per cent of NSW’s coal-fired electricity generating capacity.
Advisers have been hired in Thailand where its parent company Banpu is based.
DataRoom understands that Centennial took out a bridging loan on June 30 to tide it over.
The understanding is that a combination of Australian and Asian banks hold the existing debt.
While Asian banks are thought to be open to providing additional debt, those in Australia are understood to be reducing their exposure.
Thermal coal prices are sky high, despite it being on the nose with institutional investors.
On Monday, Newcastle coal was trading at about $US149.75.
With booming steel prices, Oaktree had also been circling the Australian steel producer InfraBuild, which sits within the GFG Alliance empire of Sanjeev Gupta.
It is subject to a recapitalisation after the collapse of key lender Greensill.
A refinancing of the Whyalla steel mill in South Australia, which is also owned by GFG, is understood to be close. A former lender to the business, White Oak, has been conducting exclusive due diligence on a recapitalisation plan.
Ares Management this year embarked on another recapitalisation of Australian drilling company Boart Longyear, worth $US795m, with similar funds including Centrebridge and Ascribe.
Centennial Coal was established in 1989 and listed in 1994 before being acquired by Banpu in 2010 for $US2bn.
The Thai energy company has been pivoting into the Australian renewable energy space of late, buying New Energy Solar’s 110 megawatt Beryl plant and 55MW Manildra facilities in NSW for a combined gross asset value of $288m.
It comes as other Australian thermal coal producers and service providers face similar challenges to Centennial Coal with respect to securing new loans, with few financiers willing to take on such groups as customers due to their investors’ concerns over environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters.
However, the saving grace for coal miners is that the price of the commodity is booming.
Word count: 356
