Rio Tinto and Sumitomo Corporation announced a partnership on Tuesday to study the construction of a hydrogen pilot plant at Rio Tinto’s Yarwun alumina refinery in Gladstone.
The partnership will also explore the potential use of hydrogen at the refinery itself.
The two global companies have signed a letter of intent which focuses on Yarwun as the location for Gladstone hydrogen plant that Sumitomo has been studying.
If the project proceeds, the pilot plant would produce hydrogen for the recently announced Gladstone Hydrogen Ecosystem.
The study supports the efforts of Australian, Queensland and local governments to establish Gladstone as a
clean hydrogen hub of the future.
Rio Tinto Australia Chief Executive Kellie Parker said Rio had a long relationship with Sumitomo and were delighted to partner with them to explore the possibilities of hydrogen.
“Not only for our own refinery, but for Sumitomo to supply industry more broadly in Gladstone,” she said.
“Reducing the carbon intensity of our alumina production will be key to meeting our 2030 and 2050 climate targets.
“There is clearly more work to be done, but partnerships and projects like this are an important part of helping us get there.”
Sumitomo Corporation’s Energy Innovation Initiative Director Hajime Mori said Sumitomo were excited about working together with Rio Tinto as a long-term partner to develop the hydrogen project.
“We believe the pilot plant will play a significant role in establishing the Gladstone Hydrogen Ecosystem,” he said.
“Sumitomo has commenced the Design Study and Preliminary Master Planning to build the Gladstone hydrogen ecosystem and we will continue to work towards future hydrogen exports from Gladstone.”
Deputy Premier and Minister for State Development Steven Miles; Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen Mick de Brenni; Gladstone MP Glenn Butcher and Gladstone Mayor Matt Burnett welcomed the partnership news.
“This is great news for the Gladstone region and Central Queensland and a significant step forward in developing our hydrogen ecosystem,” Cr Burnett said.
“This investment brings together new and existing industries and ultimately means more jobs in more industries for Central Queensland.”
Word count: 326
