THE global defence firm building Australia’s frigate fleet in Adelaide is embarking on a hiring spree that will double its 1000-strong workforce within five years.
Those jobs are part of a wider boom across the defence, space and hospitality sectors that is predicted to deliver at least 8000 jobs in SA over the next decade. Adelaide-based BAE Systems Australia will hire workers for projects including the $35 billion construction of nine Hunter Class frigates and the $1 billion Jindalee Over the Horizon Radar Network upgrade.
CONTINUED PAGE 2 Defence ready to kickstart job boom FROM PAGE 1 Workers are being sought in fields including engineering, project management, information technology and procurement.
These are part of an expected 5500 jobs predicted to be created in SA during the next decade by the $90 billion naval shipbuilding program centred on Adelaide, also involving the construction of 12 submarines.
Details of how to secure a job in the burgeoning defence sector – expected to grow from 11,000 jobs to 15,000 by 2026 – will be revealed at a jobs forum at Adelaide University on Thur­sday, backed by The Advertiser. SA’s jobless rate is at a three-year high of 7.3 per cent, figures released last week show.
BAE Systems Australia chief executive officer Gabby Costigan, whose firm is participating in the forum, said the defence industry gave South Australians a significantly greater opportunity to build a rewarding career in one of the nation’s most liveable cities.
“We really do employ some really skilled people in SA and we’re going to need a lot more to help us and the ADF deliver the contracts so important to protecting the nation,” Ms Costigan said.
Naval Group Australia, which is building the submarine fleet in a $50 billion project, expects to employ 1700 people in Adelaide when production is in full swing by 2028-29.
In the next few years, however, it wants to hire people with skills including project management, procurement and engineering – the latter including mechanical, structural, electrical and naval architecture.
Premier Steven Marshall told The Advertiser his government acknowledged challenges facing the economy and was disappointed by the latest headline jobless rate, but argued confidence was strong because more people were looking for work.
“The importance of the $90 billion shipbuilding to SA’s economic transformation can’t be overstated – this is massive for our state,” he said.
“The challenge remains to have sufficient numbers of skilled workers to meet the workforce requirements of this once-in-a-generation economic opportunity.” Mr Marshall pointed to the federal-state skills program, saying it would create an extra 20,800 apprenticeships and traineeships over four years.
University of SA defence and space director Matt Opie said about half the defence jobs in the next decade would require university qualifications and the remainder would be in technical roles, logistics, trades and administration.
“Employment numbers in the space sector are not as large as shipbuilding and more specialised. Companies operating in the space sector are seeking employees with skills in mechanical, electrical and aerospace engineering,” he said.
The space industry – Australia’s agency is based in Adelaide – is expected to rise from 800 jobs to 3000 by 2030.
In the hospitality sector, Adelaide Casino is recruiting about 800 people during the next year ahead of the October 2020 opening of its $330 million expansion – a 12-storey building will include a 123-room luxury hotel, three restaurants, three new bars and conference facilities for up to 500 people. Among recruits is Jodi Brown, the hotel’s general manager, who previously managed Sydney’s QT Hotel.
“This is an amazing opportunity – building a hotel from the ground up, creating a brand personality and leading a team,” Ms Brown said.Almost 90 per cent of the 800 new roles will be in hospitality, including 100 chefs and more than 300 food and beverage staff. Of these, 60 are now being sought for The Guardsman, a new Adelaide Railway Station bar and dining hall.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 659
