South Australian Premier Steven Marshall said Mr Morrison and his government had been ­crucial to SA’s reform agenda, adding the looming March 19 state election would be won by the Liberal Party despite published opinion polls suggesting a possible Labor victory.
Mr Marshall, who promised a lower taxation climate than under Labor, acknowledged tightness in the polls but cautioned that SA elections were, historically, mostly closely fought contests.
“Obviously the polls are tight. Everybody would like to be 60-40 up with 10 days to go but that is not the reality very often,” the Premier told The Australian.
With the SA budget due to go into the black next year after the state endured just 10 days of Covid lockdown over the past two years, Mr Marshall is going to the people pledging a strong economy, jobs growth and citing cuts to payroll tax, land tax and energy prices during the government’s four-year term.
He said the government’s economic reforms could not have been achieved without the assistance of Mr Morrison. “All I can say is we have been extremely well supported by the Prime Minister, the federal cabinet and the Coalition over four years in government,” the Premier said.
He also strongly supported the continuation of the ­national cabinet, which was introduced in response to the pandemic and where he is the longest-serving Liberal leader, now in his 10th year in charge of the SA party.
Mr Marshall won his first election in 2018, and is seeking a second term on Saturday week.
He said national cabinet needed to widen its agenda as the pandemic crisis eased, putting its attention on policy areas such as domestic violence, women’s economic security, and skills.
SA has pivoted since 2018 towards hi-tech enterprises, increasing the use of renewable energy, turning towards the space industry, and expanding defence.
The pandemic, Mr Marshall said, had allowed the government to encourage outside interest in the economy because of the state’s relatively strong performance compared with other states and countries.
Mr Marshall said he remained concerned about the potential for unions to have a significantly greater say in SA if Labor leader Peter Malinauskas wins office.
“He’s never held an economic portfolio. He’s the ex-union boss. We haven’t had a union (boss) as the premier of South Australia for decades and decades and there’s a very good reason why,’’ he said.
Mr Marshall’s support for the Morrison government comes amid questions about whether the Prime Minister’s standing could undermine the Liberals’ attempts to win a second term in South Australia. Senior Liberals have privately expressed concerns about Mr Marshall’s ability to win the election on March 19 amid an apparent surge in interest in Labor’s relatively new leader.
Labor sources said support for the Marshall government had diminished after the state had opened up last November.
Sources said there had been a noticeable drop off in support for Mr Marshall when cases and deaths spiked, although the response, by world standards, has still been relatively successful.
A 2 per cent swing to Labor would deliver four extra seats in the 47-seat parliament, with the possibility of gaining support from Labor-leaning independent Frances Bedford. This would hand Labor office.
Mr Marshall cautioned against the over interpretation of polling numbers, with many people yet to tune into the contest. “I think people have got to be very careful and always sceptical about polling numbers now,” he said.
“I think the election is going down to the wire.”
Word count: 562
