ElectraNet and TransGrid wanted the market rules changed to allow them to secure debt for the 900km transmission line.
But the Australian Energy Market Commission has flagged in its draft determination on the proposal, released on Thursday, that it does not intend to do this.
TransGrid has stated without the change, which would allow both it and ElectraNet to start charging consumers for Project EnergyConnect before it was completed and operational, it would be difficult to attract finance for the project.
The AEMC disagreed with this and instead found “no barrier to financing large-scale transmission projects under current energy rules”.
It found the proposal “would have significant downsides for consumers”.
“Our draft determinations find nothing in the rules to prevent large transmission projects like those identified in the market operator’s integrated system plan from attracting finance,” AEMC Chief Executive Benn Barr said.
“These TransGrid and ElectraNet proposals would cost consumers money and expose them to greater risks.
“Effectively it wants consumers to pay for energy assets as they are being built – like asking motorists to pay tolls on roads before they can be built and used.”
Chief entrepreneur, Jim Whalley, urges SA look at providing free energy through a combination of renewable and nuclear fuel, capitalising on technology advances to use small reactors to power towns across the state during The Advertiser's Kickstart SA virtual round table.
The Commission found the proposal would, at a minimum, increase household electricity bills in SA by $4 a year in the short-to-medium term.
The Interconnector was meant to save consumers $100 a year.
The Commission also found that “significant reductions in wholesale electricity prices as a result of Project EnergyConnect are not expected to occur until after 2030”.
“This means that consumers now will be paying more for Project EnergyConnect than consumers in the future, despite consumers not receiving the benefits now,” it stated.
An ElectraNet spokesman said the company noted the preliminary decision “and we will now take time to consider it in detail”.
“Project EnergyConnect remains an important project for the national electricity grid and a priority project for the Australian Energy Market Operator and federal and state governments,” he said.
“The financeability rule change proposals are about bringing forward the timing of revenue recovery to support the financeability of major projects and importantly, electricity customers were not being asked to pay any more over the life of the project.
“We look forward to working with the AEMC, AER and other stakeholders to further discuss the preliminary decision.”
Opposition spokesman Tom Koutsantonis said the “government’s entire strategy on energy was about building this interconnector to New South Wales”.
“The government has got to tell us what their plan B is,” he said.
Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the draft determination did not reject the project but rather a financing proposal.
“We are underwriting work on both sides of the border, with ElectraNet in South Australia and with TransGrid in New South Wales, to keep the project moving, to keep it on the timeline, because we are determined that South Australians get the benefits of this project as quickly as possible,” he told State Parliament on Thursday.
Mr van Holst Pellekaan told The Advertiser the AEMC “makes it clear this project is important and investible”.
“It’s important that the critical infrastructure needed to secure our grid, drive down electricity prices and accelerate the development of renewable energy is built in a timely and cost-effective manner,” he said.
“Work on Project EnergyConnect is progressing due to the South Australian Government’s early works agreements with TransGrid and ElectraNet to ensure that the swiftest construction schedule is maintained.”
“It’s time SA Labor drop its reckless opposition to this critical project, which will bring a new wave of huge renewable energy projects to South Australia”.
Submissions to the draft determination are due on March 18.
Word count: 617
