SMARTdaily NUTRITION Five easy ways to supercharge your diet for maximum vitalitY
After weeks, if not months, of living in a restrictive way, it is not surprising the energy levels of many Australians are on the low side.
With some of us still in the daily reality of pandemic living and the fatigue that accompanies it, and others preparing for life with more freedom, it is time to get our nutrition and energy levels back on track so we can look and feel our best to power on no matter what the next few months look like.
TIME FOR A CLEAN OUT We have all turned to the biscuits, treats and alcohol a little more than we should have this past year, but it is time to take control and have a good clean out of the fridge and cupboards at home. The most significant predictor of discretionary or junk food intake is availability, which means that if you have high-calorie, tempting foods at home, you will eat them, no matter how much self-control you think you have. This means all of the extra snacks, desserts, alcohol, cheese and treats need to go.
GET YOUR COLOUR ON The more brightly coloured fresh fruits and vegetables you include in your day, the higher your intake of key vitamins and minerals, as well as dietary fibre to support digestive health. A regular, high intake of fruits and vegetables is closely associated with positive mood, weight control, digestive health and long-term health, but fewer than one in 10 Aussies get their recommended daily intake. Start by adding extra vegies or fresh fruit to each of your meals – a mixed vegie juice with your breakfast, a salad or soup at lunch and add some roasted vegetables to dinner.
KEEP WELL FUELLED Regular meals and snacks enjoyed every 3-4 hours is one of the easiest ways to keep your blood glucose levels regulated. Often, we forget the power of balanced meals and replace these with coffee or processed snacks which results in cravings, fluctuating energy levels, fatigue and irritability. Simply combining one protein-rich food such as lean meat, fish, dairy or nuts with a good quality carbohydrate such as wholegrain bread, fruit, legumes or crackers in each of your meals and snacks will support energy regulation and increase your intake of key nutrients.
BOOST YOUR OMEGA-3s Another key nutrient of which fewer that one in 10 Aussies get enough is the Omega-3s found naturally in high amounts in oily fish such as salmon as well as in smaller amounts in seeds, nuts and wholegrains. Omega-3 fats play an important role in mood regulation, with those who have an especially high intake of Omega-3 less likely to suffer from anxiety and depression. Oily fish is also a good source of Vitamin D, which when combined with sunlight plays an important role in mood regulation. Aim to include fish in your diet at least every second day, along with a daily intake of seeds, nuts and grains.
GET VICES UNDER CONTROL You may have a soft spot for wine, coffee or diet soft drink – or all three – but whatever your indulgence is, it is time to get it under control. You may find that a period without alcohol is what you need; or swapping your soft drink habit for water or kombucha, or you may need to cut back on the coffee a little. A period with a minimal intake of foods or drinks that tend to do more harm than good is a good way to recalibrate. As a general rule, aim for three to four alcohol-free days, just a couple of cups of coffee each day, and minimal soft drink intake.
Susie Burrell is one of Australia’s leading dietitians, with honours degrees in nutrition and dietetics and psychology
Energy goals Energy boost checklist ●Daily sunlight ● Daily exercise ● Plenty of sleep ● 2-3 cups vegetables/ salad per meal ● Fish 2-3 times a week
Ultimate energy food day ● Breakfast: Mixed vegetable juice, bowl of Bircher muesli with Greek yoghurt and berries.
● Snack: Punnet of berries.
● Lunch: Poke bowl with salmon and brown rice, fermented vegies. Kombucha. ● Snack: Banana, handful of mixed nuts and seeds or nut snack bar. ● Dinner: Lean steak, roasted mixed vegetables served with hommus.
CREDIT: SUSIE BURRELL
Word count: 725
