The federal government is backing the world's largest solar-powered vanadium flow battery to be built near Hawker in the Flinders Ranges.
The $20.3 million project, developed by Yadlamalka Energy, will also incorporate a 6MW solar photovoltaic array at the Neuroodla electricity substation.
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency has granted $5.7 million in funding to support the installation of the battery component of the project.
Located within the SA Power Networks distribution network, the project will be connected to the National Electricity Market and will help bolster South Australia's energy security.
Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said longer duration energy storage is one of five priority technologies identified by the federal government in the Technology Investment Roadmap to accelerate the competitiveness of new and emerging technologies with higher emissions alternatives.
"Longer duration energy storage is a key focus because it will enable reliable, firmed wind and solar at prices around the average wholesale electricity price of today," he said.
"Getting the technologies of the future right will support 130,000 jobs by 2030 and drive down emissions."
The project will create up to 100 jobs during the construction phase as well as ongoing employment opportunities for locals.
Neuroodla is located at a relatively weak part of the distribution network. The connection of energy storage alongside additional renewable energy generation is expected to improve the reliability of energy supply within the region.
Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey said there has been a large drop in the price of wholesale electricity with the heavy investment in renewables in South Australia.
"This has created an often, over-supplied market," Mr Ramsey said.
"This in turn has created more instability in the grid and stabilisation projects like this one are essential to back up the renewable generators."
The vanadium flow battery will charge from electricity produced by solar panels when the sun is at its peak.
This electricity can then be delivered when it is most needed, such as in the evening when grid loads are high from consumer demand, but solar generation is no longer available.
By using vanadium flow batteries to complete this 'time shift', solar power becomes 'dispatchable', meaning it can be deployed to the grid when it is most valuable, at any time of day or night.
Yadlamalka Energy Trust founder and chairman Andrew Doman commented on the motivation to construct South Australia's first dispatchable solar power plant
"Through using breakthrough technology in the form of vanadium flow batteries, we can deliver strong, economic infrastructure benefit to South Australia and at the same time support a low carbon economy," he said.
"Yadlamalka Energy is committed to developing renewable technology solutions to enable a sustainable energy future.
"This project will provide vital support for the electricity grid in South Australia, which relies heavily on intermittent renewable energy sources, leaving it vulnerable to unexpected changes in sunshine and wind.
"We will continue to work closely as we start construction with commissioning expected at the end of 2021."
CREDIT: Amy Green
Word count: 498
