The Scorecard ranks the progress of federal, state and territory governments in switching Australia’s domestic energy systems to renewables and establishing renewable export opportunities.
It found that Tasmania remains in the lead due to its strong track record and world-leading renewable energy targets of 200 per cent by 2040.
NSW was the most improved, and moving from equal third with Victoria to second, while South Australia came in third.
“In the wake of the COP26, more and more countries are accelerating their shift to renewable energy and it’s encouraging to see our states rising to the challenge through increased ambitions and strong action,” WWF-Australia Energy Transition Manager Nicky Ison said.
“We need committed federal direction, policy and funding to enable all states and territories to realise their renewables ambitions.
While states moved up the leaderboard, the Federal Government fell further behind, coming in at the bottom of the rankings after “missing the opportunity” at COP26 in Glasgow to announce an expansion of its support for domestic renewables, electrification, and new renewable export industries, Ms Ison said.
Young climate crusader takes fight to major Tassie super fund
A young Tasmanian climate activist has launched a campaign to pressure the state’s biggest superannuation fund to fully divest from fossil fuels.
Australian Youth Climate Coalition nipaluna/Hobart convener Zoe Douglas created a stir last year when she declined a Tasmanian Young Achiever award sponsored by super fund Tasplan. In her speech, she pointed to the fund’s investment in coal, oil, and gas companies as her reason for turning the award down.
Tasplan merged with MTAA Super in April to form Spirit Super, but that hasn’t stopped Ms Douglas, 24, from scrutinising the new fund’s investment practices.
“Super companies have a responsibility to their members to create the kind of world that we want to live in in 50 years, when people are starting to retire and don’t want to be in a climate catastrophe,” she said.
Ms Douglas, currently based in Sydney, said that in her discussions with Spirit Super representatives, she had been told the fund had more than $154 million invested in energy companies that engaged in fracking and it wasn’t considering divesting from them in the short-term.
“(Spirit Super has) said that they want to keep investing in these companies to make them better on climate,” she said. “But then they’re not prepared to … put their shareholder vote in public. To me that’s not accountability and that’s not transparent.”
Ahead of the super fund’s annual members meeting last night, Ms Douglas used social media platforms to encourage people to send questions to Spirit Super about its investment in fossil fuel companies.
Spirit Super chair Naomi Edwards said the fund believed climate change was “one of the most significant risks to our portfolio and is absolutely committed to mitigating these risks”.
“That’s why in September this year the board of Spirit Super signed off on an ambitious new strategy to reduce the fund’s total carbon footprint, across all industry sectors, by 50 per cent prior to 2030,” she said.
“This will be achieved by a renewed commitment to investment in renewable technologies and small business innovations that support the transition to a low carbon economy.”
Ms Edwards noted that the energy sector represented about 5 per cent of global share markets, while Spirit Super’s exposure was less than half that and included a “significant” investment in renewable energy assets.
She said the fund’s environmental, social and governance risks framework “screens out” assets and managers that presented considerable climate change risks.
Word count: 571
