The training organisation has made 7629 offers for students starting in February, down 13 per cent compared to last year.
However, as TAFE takes enrolments on a rolling basis the intake is expected to grow.
“The number of offers made for courses fluctuate each year, according to anticipated needs of industry,” a TAFE spokesman said.
“With the rolling intake, we are expecting total enrolment numbers to increase across the coming offer rounds.”
Courses in health, dental services, animal studies, beauty and renewable energy were particularly popular as students look to skill up for jobs of the future.
Nursing, laboratory technology, veterinary nursing and animal technology courses were full.
“While our nursing and pathology courses have again attracted high numbers, we have also seen increased interest in our cyber security qualifications which is a key growth area for the state,” TAFE SA chief executive David Coltman said.
“As well as these courses, we will also introduce new courses during the year.
“These will include undergraduate certificates in Industry 4.0 (digital technologies) and in drafting for building and construction.”
Overall, there were 12,574 applications, up 5 per cent on the 2020 main offer round.
Reasons for not getting an offer include courses being full and applicants lacking prerequisites or not providing all necessary information.
TAFE pledged to work with students in coming weeks.
Further offers will be made weekly from Friday January 15 through to April 21.
Last year, TAFE decided to cut at least 20 courses – mainly businesses-related courses in metropolitan Adelaide – but introduced 21 new options.
“Our training profile for Semester 1 2021 aligns to the state’s workforce needs and will ensure more South Australians have access to education and training for their future,” Mr Coltman said.
“We are currently seeing a 9 per cent increase in our apprentice and trainee enrolments compared to the same time last year.
“We will continue working closely with industry across all of our program areas to make sure students are learning the latest skills, with up-to-date technology, that is hands-on and making them job ready.”
Veterinary nursing student Charlotte Johnson said the TAFE staff had done an amazing job because they had to close practical lessons for a couple of months due to coronavirus restrictions.
“We haven’t been held back at all,” she said.
Ms Johnson has another six months to go on her Certificate IV and loves working with animals.
“It is a very popular course, so I was lucky to get in,” she said.
Mr Coltman said switching to more online delivery during the pandemic had caused a rethink, leading to some changes that would be ongoing.
“We have seen an incredible transformation of TAFE SA, and the vocational education sector as a whole, over the past few months,” he said.
“Our educators have changed the way they deliver training and education so that students can continue their learning, and these initiatives will continue.
“It’s a really important time for the local economy and we are ready to support, educate and train our students, both in metropolitan and regional areas, to ensure they have the right skills for the right jobs.
Australia is facing a shortage of skilled trade workers as there's been a shift to concentrate on getting kids into university over TAFE or learning a trade.
“We are also committed to investing in new initiatives to improve our student experience – from campus upgrades to new technology and infrastructure, and this is happening right across the state. This comes with an increased focus on quality and innovation.”
MONDAY: See who’s been offered a place in TAFE SA in our searchable list
Word count: 577
