South Australia’s strong renewables sector is set to grow even stronger, creating thousands of new career pathways
ADL FUTURE ADELAIDE JOBS FOR YOU SPECIAL REPORT
When it comes to clean energy, South Australia is ahead of the game. The state is already home to 22 wind farms, three utility-scale solar farms, the world’s first big battery and an emerging clean hydrogen sector.
There are currently more than 40 renewable energy projects in the development pipeline representing $32 billion in capital investment.
This exponential growth is also giving rise to an expansive – and expanding – range of job opportunities, with roles in engineering, trades, project management, health and safety, equipment, technology and services, energy projects and infrastructure. For Thomas Daly, it has also offered the chance to explore new employment avenues.
The electrical engineer is now a project manager with French company Neoen, Australia’s leading renewable energy developer and the company behind the world’s first big battery – the 150MW Hornsdale Power Reserve in the state’s Mid North.
His role involves managing the development of renewable energy – wind, solar and/or battery projects – from project inception to finance, construction and operation.
“In the early stage of development my work involves speaking to the community and individual landholders about hosting projects on their land, development application, grid connection studies, selecting contractors and service providers to build the project, and supporting other members of the Neoen Australia team to find power purchase agreements to sell the power to different groups,” he says.
“My previous roles have been more technically based but this role is very broad – parts of it are technical and other parts are people-focused. I spend a lot of time dealing with different people and I enjoy that breadth of communication and the different challenges it brings.” Neoen Australia currently has two major projects in development: Crystal Brook Energy Park, a $500 million renewable energy project in the state’s Mid North which will include around 125MW of wind from 26 wind turbines, 150MW of solar PV and up to 130MW/400MWh of battery storage; and Goyder Renewables Zone, a $3 billion renewable energy project combining wind and solar generation and battery storage.
Stage 1 of the project, to be built near Burra, is expected to begin construction next year. “Goyder is an exciting project for us and the next one to go into construction for Neoen in South Australia,” Daly says. “ At the peak of construction of Stage 1, there could be more than 300 people on site. That resource won’t be able to be secured from Burra itself so will need to come from all around the state.” Once completed, a number of full-time operational roles will be created at Goyder Renewables Zone.
“A lot of developers sell projects to someone else to build and then operate but Neoen develops, finances, owns and operates projects so we have a long-term commitment to the region,” he says.
For Daly, who studied electrical and electronic engineering at The University of Adelaide and has spent most of his career to date in technical roles, the chance to stretch his people and communication skills is proving a rewarding experience.
“Although I really enjoy the technical side of my career, I thought something with a bit more focus on developing projects from the beginning and having ownership of the project through its life cycle would be attractive,” he says.
“Working with Neoen and servicing the power industry in general has been exciting – it’s going through a massive transition. South Australia is at the forefront in a good and bad way – we’re experiencing some of the issues which means we were one of the first states to actually address the problems and come up with solutions.
“The Hornsdale Power Reserve is an example of something that needed a kick start to happen: the benefits have been significant and it has inspired others to push the transition along.
“So working in South Australia is really exciting in that respect.”
WHAT DOES A CAREER IN ENERGY LOOK LIKE?
South Australia is a global leader in the transition towards clean energy. In just over 15 years, the state’s electricity mix has gone from less than 1 per cent renewables to 62 per cent renewable energy. The industry employs those working on an ever-growing list of projects transforming the state’s energy use to net 100 per cent renewable generation by 2030. There is forecast demand for people with skills in engineering to trades, and project management, to health and safety. Many other specialist roles will also relate to equipment, technology and services to energy projects and infrastructure.
Scan the QR: Watch Tom’s story > 4000 JOBS IN RENEWABLE ENERGY > 100% NET RENEWABLE ENERGY BY 2030 > $20B INVESTMENT IN THE DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE SA is a global leader in the transition towards clean energy. In just over 15 years, the state’s electricity mix has gone from less than 1 per cent renewables to 62 per cent. The industry employs those working on projects transforming the state’s energy use to net 100 per cent renewable generation by 2030. SECTOR EMPLOYERS INCLUDE: > Australian Gas Infastructure Group > ElectraNet > Iberdrola Australia > Neoen > Santos > Tesla > H2U > Vena Energy Australia
Word count: 878
