Given many over-50s also have ailments such as diabetes, heart and lung conditions, even if vaccinated with AstraZeneca it will still be risky to travel overseas. However, if you are vaccinated with Pfizer, far more effective but unavailable by government command to almost all over-50s, then you’re far safer travelling overseas as research shows. Guess which vaccine our political leaders chose to vaccinate themselves with? Pfizer, of course.
Paul Raffaele, Leichhardt, NSW
Out of an abundance of optimism, Chris Kenny suggests Australians under 50 and healthy should not “be bothered about vaccination” (“Prisoners of Mother Australia”, 17-18/4). This in the same weekend the world registered three million deaths from COVID-19 and it was revealed that Brazil can’t treat its patients or bury its dead. Our politicians are not “panicked and power-crazed”, Chris, they are trying to stop a mutating virus reaching here before Australians (including those under 50) are vaccinated.
Hugh Lunn, St Lucia South, Qld
Do commentators ever consider the barrage of misinformation (false news) the government of the day has to sift through before they begin the task of governance? Now that we’ve obtained the inglorious total of three plus million deaths from 141 million cases worldwide, those who have proclaimed post-COVID as a foregone conclusion may change their analysis, although I doubt it.
As for those who proclaim they still will not be getting the jab, one assumes this is a direct result of too many “world experts” offering opinions at a moment’s notice. I’m due for my shot on May 1 and I cannot wait.
John Bain, South Bunbury, WA
Old King Coal
Coal still will account for 22 per cent of the world’s electricity by 2040, with Asia showing an ongoing demand. Labor says it will not stand in the way of new coalmines in Australia (“Labor drops hostility to coal”, 19/4). That’s good news for the miners and their families and the Australian economy since coal exports accounted for $55bn last year, but I’m not convinced by Labor’s new bromance with coal. There’s still the quid pro quo for Labor: preference deals with the Greens. Labor can allay fears by backing the construction of new (clean) coal-fired power stations as part of its upcoming election manifesto to secure a reliable energy source for manufacturing and future generations.
Glenn Marchant, Pascoe Vale, Vic
Nowhere in Scott Morrison’s announcement of his government’s $1.08bn energy deal with South Australia does he mention coal (“PM’s $1bn deal to power up energy delivery”, 19/4). These days the PM’s focus is on gas, renewables and hydrogen. Indeed, these sources saturate the government’s energy planning. While gas deserves to be included, it is irresponsible of Morrison to ignore coal in favour of intermittent wind and solar as well as hydrogen, which has yet to prove itself as a viable energy source. Apparently one of the aims of the deal is to help SA achieve its net-100 per cent renewable energy goal by 2030. All this scheme will achieve is to condemn South Australians to a life of energy misery. Without coal-fired pow­er, not only SA but the nation will be on the road to economic ruin.
Dale Ellis, Innisfail, Qld
Farewell our liege
Your dedicated page featuring some remarkably affecting photographs of the Duke of Edinburgh’s funeral was certainly worth a thousand words; in particular, a socially distanced monarch without her husband of 73 years by her side.
In an age where we are used to celebrity relationships and marriages imploding after only several years in a fit of Twitter-expelled resentment and scandal, we are reminded how attractive are the marital bonds that persevere throughout the decades, only to end when death indeed does part.
While no one would be shocked at the sudden passing of a 99- year-old man who had recently endured multiple operations and infections, there is indeed an abiding sadness at his death, for the majority of citizens within the Commonwealth have known during their lives only the benevolent reign of Elizabeth and the comforting sight of her husband, either by her side or dutifully two or three steps in her wake.
Peter Waterhouse, Craigieburn, Vic
Word count: 673
