Whyalla City Council, Media Release, 18 May 2021
Whyalla’s ambitions to be a key player in both the State and Federal Governments’ hydrogen plans have been given a significant boost, with the State Government seeking expressions of interest (EOIs) to develop land at nearby Port Bonython.
The Marshall Government has labelled the site ‘one of SA’s most prospective hydrogen export hubs’, which City of Whyalla Mayor Clare McLaughlin said was fantastic news for the city.
“Whyalla is a proud, heavy-industry city, with mining, manufacturing, steelworks, and fuel and energy production at our core,” Mayor McLaughlin said. 
“Investing in clean hydrogen, green steel, energy storage and carbon capture – particularly on our doorstep – is critical to our city’s future; and aligns with the green vision of both the city and our main employer, GFG Alliance.
“We therefore welcome the State Government’s focus on developing this area of importance, as well as for recognising that our city is well positioned – both geographically and with a highly-skilled workforce, plus key road, port, airport and rail infrastructure in place – to support our state and nation’s push towards net zero emissions.”
Mayor McLaughlin said while Council was keen to develop industry in the city, it would not do so at the expense of the natural environment.
“Importantly for us, the State Government has recognised Port Bonython’s rich and unique aquaculture environment – including a marine sanctuary to protect the Giant Australian Cuttlefish – and will ensure all future projects comply with strict environmental legislation,” she said.
“Hydrogen will also play a key role in our environmental ambitions by helping transition our heavy industry to a low-carbon future, which will be essential for the long-term prosperity of our city.
“We believe the decarbonisation of heavy industry presents an exciting opportunity for Whyalla to diversify its economy and support the development of new technologies that will deliver significant economic benefit to state and the national GDP.”
In a statement, State Government Treasurer Rob Lucas said the state-owned site has outstanding access to multiple renewable energy zones and boasts over 2,000 hectares of available land, as well as access to an existing deep-water port, including the 2.4km-long jetty which has been approved for a $37 million State Government-funded upgrade.
He said EOIs will be rated on their ability to develop projects that have the potential to create economic growth and regional development on the Eyre Peninsula, as well SA more broadly, and contribute to Port Bonython as a multi-user, export-focused precinct to leverage the state’s advantages in renewable energy, fuels and minerals.
“This is a significant piece of land that, when properly developed, has the potential to create significant economic and jobs growth not only for the Upper Spencer Gulf, but for the whole of South Australia,” Mr Lucas said.
“Having a hydrogen hub exporting to Australian and international markets will leverage the $20 billion pipeline of large-scale renewable energy projects under development in South Australia. Our state is a great place in which to do business and we are committed to becoming a national and international exporter of clean power while obtaining our goals of 100 per cent renewables and 50 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030.”
EOI documentation is available via the SA Tenders and Contracts website.
Word count: 547
