Scientists finally crack the foggy car window formula
FOGGY car windows on winter mornings could soon be a thing of the past. New research from Melbourne scientists has discovered that motorists could be wasting their time by cranking their fans on full blast.
Researchers at Monash University in Melbourne, Zhejiang University in China and the University of Pennsylvania in the US ran thousands of tests to settle the everyday problem of how best to defog windows before driving in cold climates.
The research is to be used by the automotive industry to design trucks and cars with airconditioning systems that are automatically better at reducing condensation.
Scientists found the recipe for success was air flowing at a speed of 0.6m per second, humidity within 20-60 per cent and temperatures of 19C-25C.
Windows defogged fastest when temperatures were raised to 46.8C, but this result would leave drivers and passengers sweating and highly uncomfortable.
Jisheng Zhao, from Monash’s Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, said foggy windows were an everyday problem that could have dangerous consequences.
“The idea for the study actually came from a professor who could see fogging form on the front screen while waiting for traffic lights,” he said.
“But if you can’t see out your cars that’s an obvious safety risk and something truck drivers encounter regularly.
“We wanted to see what was the minimum amount of energy we could spend to defog the window in a decent way.” For many motorists, the temptation is to turn the car’s fans on to full speed to speed up the process and get on the road quickly.
But Dr Zhao said he and other researchers had found that doing this had little impact and was unlikely to speed up the process.
“You are just wasting your energy,” he said.
“If you have a higher air flow speed that doesn’t help you much. “Humidity and temperature have a clear impact on fogging.
“The human body is also important because it has an impact on the internal temperature of your car the moment you get inside.” Dr Zhao, who is working with a global team to tackle the issue within truck cabins, said the research had given them a basic guideline that could be used to build a hi-tech solution.
CREDIT: KIERAN ROONEY
Word count: 382
