As of June 2021, Western Downs’ gross regional product sat at a massive $5.54b.
Western Downs Mayor Paul McVeigh said the Western Downs’ geography, environment, and infrastructure created an investment opportunity rivalling any other region in Australia.
“Our region has the perfect mix of strong industry, rich cultural experiences and good old-fashioned country charm, which is underpinned by four economic pillars; agriculture, intensive agriculture, energy and manufacturing,” he said.
Mr McVeigh said the growth of the agriculture industry and approved energy projects would create permanent jobs across the region.
“Every 100 head of cattle creates 1.6 jobs. Just the wind farm at Dulacca will create (150 jobs and) up to 20 long-term jobs,” he said.
According to the TSBE and Western Downs Regional Council Development Status Report (June 2020), here’s a rundown of major energy and agriculture projects destined for the region:
Agriculture projects
The region is set to deepen its economic roots in intensive agriculture with seven new or expanding feedlots set to be developed in the near future, creating hundreds of jobs.
A Major $20m expansion is underway at the Bottle Tree Feedlot at Greenswamp, which will allow the operation to hold 40,000 SCU.
The Warrigal Hills Feedlot at Grosmont will hold 5,418 SCU with the completion of a $5.15m upgrade.
The feedlots at Roche Creek and Drillham South will also expand their capacity with $1m improvements, as well as another feedlot being developed at Roche Creek by Beef Connect.
The construction of a 149 SCU feedlot at Hopland has been approved by the council on behalf of Mr D E Flett.
Also, the Jimbour East Feedlot will undergo a $1m upgrade/extension which will see the capacity of the lot grow to 1000 SCU.
A $5m upgrade will be carried out at the Livestock Processing Facility abattoir at Jimbour East and once the four-year constitution project is completed the abattoir will hold 1,200 livestock daily.
The council is also in the process of allowing Australian Country Choice to build a 65,000 cattle feedlot north west of Moonie.
Renewable Projects
With the Queensland Government’s goal of being 50 per cent run by renewables in 2030, Mayor McVeigh said the Western Downs was leading the way to help the state reach that target.
Two renewable projects, which are set to create close to 300 jobs, are yet to commence on the Western Downs.
The Renewable Energy Partners and Cubico Sustainable Investments wind farm at the Bunya Mountains and Elecseed’s solar farm at Kumbarilla, are forecast to diversify the region’s energy production as well as provide hundreds of job opportunities.
Fourteen projects have had been given green light to go ahead; RES Dalby and Dulacca wind and solar farms, Yellow Solar and Tilt Renewables Hopeland solar farm, Fotowatio Renewable Ventures Dalby solar farm, Engie Renewables Australia Hookswood solar farm, Daystar Energy Columboola solar farm, Ubergy Pty Baking Board solar farm, two Everleigh Solar Park Crossroads solar farms, X-Elio Australia Cameby and Jimbour East solar farms, SMK Consultants Rywung solar farm, and the Juwi Renewable Energy Chances Plain and Dulacca solar farms.
Fossil fuel projects
Wandoan has been tipped for a key thermal coal cut mine along with the relevant infrastructure such as processing facilities and train lines.
New Hope Coal, who owns the controversial New Acland Coal Mine, hopes to build three projects in Wandoan; the $30m Elimatta Project, $652m Collingwood Project, and The Woori Project.
New Hope Coal also has four exploration permits covering 870 sqkm in Dalby.
Another coal project in the ‘feasibility’ stage is Stanmore Coal’s The Range Project, which has been in the works since 2010.
The $599m open cut coal mine 25km south west of Wandoan plans to extract 157m tonnes of coal over 26 years.
Other mining companies who have exploration permits in Wandoan include Waratah Coal, Stanmore Coal, Metro Mining, and Moreton Resources, with a combined permit footprint of 2021sq km.
Australia Pacific LNG is in the process of developing a gas project near Tara, which may include infrastructure such as ponds, wells, water gathering networks, and gas pipelines.
APLNG is co-owned by Origin, Conoco Phillips, and Sincopec.
In the heart of Queensland’s coal seam gas field at Miles, Central Petroleum has a gas exploration permit covering 77sq km.
In a 50/50 partnership Incitec Pivot, the companies began drilling test gas wells in early 2021 for the $50m project.
Other companies granted exploration permits across the region include; United Queensland, Pan Asia JV, Armour Energy and APLNG in Chinchilla, Armour Energy in Dalby, Tag Oil in Tara, and Real Energy Strata-X in Miles.
Word count: 731
