Those concerned about the upward degrees of climate change see disaster ahead for ourselves, our health, forests, animals and plants. There will be huge costs from more frequent flooding, fires, storms and the biodiversity loss that will impact our enjoyment and our value as a tourist destination.
What to do? When Elon Musk said he could build a battery storage system to stabilise the grid in South Australia in 100 days in 2017 he did it. Last year in SA for September and October wholesale prices were negative for almost 40 per cent of those months. Why hold the hands of the fossil fuel merchants any longer? They cost us huge amounts in subsidies and threaten our existence.
Elaine Hopper, Blackburn, Vic
What a disappointing situation developing with so-called Rich Lister Mike Cannon-Brookes attempting, with wealth garnered from the tech revolution, to impose on ordinary Australians his version of what we need, or should have, as far as the climate is concerned. An $8bn bid for AGL to transition away from coal? I would be interested to see Cannon-Brookes set up a stall in the main street of Cessnock in NSW, or Collie in Western Australia, or Dysart and Blackwater in Queensland, and tell the ordinary working people why he and Brookfield want to spend $8bn on shutting down demand for the resource their livelihoods depend on. What about spending it on their towns’ schools and young people, teaching them how to get out of poverty? Time to wake up and woke down. Arrogance is easy, leadership is hard.
Stephen Ferrier, Kingsley, WA
The very real threat to manufacturing implicit in the Cannon-Brookes/Brookfield proposal can be obviated by the Foreign Investment Review Board imposing conditions that require the new owners to guarantee the current level of supply for at least the planned life of the coal-fired infrastructure. Failure to provide will result in penalties commensurate with the resultant losses to industry. Not much of a disincentive for one so absolutely sure of the performance of renewables.
Michael E. Saul, Scarborough, Qld
Cold comfort
The announcement of additional funding for Australia’s Antarctic program is welcome but does not compensate for the recent abandonment of plans to construct a year-round runway near Davis Station. Such a facility would permit transport between Australia and Antarctica of personnel belonging to all nations’ programs. This would allow Australia to act as gatekeeper for east Antarctica, retaining leadership and oversight of international activities within the Australian Antarctic Territory. In its absence it seems likely China will construct its own runway. The proposed Australian site is on relatively flat, saline ground and its development would have little direct environmental impact. The probable Chinese site, near their station at Larsemann Hills, may cause greater damage as well as being beyond our ken.
Jeremy Smith, Armidale, NSW
Preaching
“Our” ABC managing director David Anderson’s reasoning behind climate change reporting (Media, 21/2) is betrayed by his organisation’s modus operandi. The ABC does not air opinions from highly and relevantly qualified scientists who dispute the IPCC zeitgeist, whether they have any vested interests in fossil fuel industries or not. However, it has often faithfully reported the opinions of Malcolm Turnbull on this, even though he has no relevant qualifications and has substantial investments in the renewable energy sector. Many other spokesmen the ABC trusts work for departments or other bodies whose funding is dependent upon there being “a climate emergency”or who are pursuing a political agenda. The ABC is preaching, not informing.
Tim Noble, Southbank, Vic
Indefensible
I know it is difficult for some voters to understand, but it was the Labor government that cut expenditure on defence. The Coalition government is now trying to play catch-up by spending over 2 per cent of GDP on our aircraft, warships, missiles and personnel. However, it’s not like buying this equipment from eBay, Amazon or the Harvey Norman catalogue. It takes time. Of course, we can always order from China, which seems to have a very well-oiled production line and could probably deliver in half the time at half the price. Just a thought.
D. Adams, Toorak, Vic
Word count: 671
