Whyalla has been identified as one of the potential locations for a hydrogen hub, along with Bell Bay in Tasmania, Gladstone in Queensland, Hunter Valley in New South Wales, Darwin in the Northern Territory, and La Trobe Valley in Victoria.
The hubs are expected to create a pipeline of jobs and ­attract private investment by locating hydrogen users, exporters and producers together in a single area.
A new certification for Australian hydrogen also will be developed as a guarantee of origin, as part of the push to become a major producer and exporter by 2030.
The new funding bolsters South Australia’s chance of ­securing a hub, as numerous states were competing fiercely for the $70m export hub announced in last year’s budget.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison will also announce $263.7m to fund new carbon capture, use and storage projects and hubs, as part of wider efforts to slash greenhouse gas emissions.
Australia is under growing pressure to set a target to reach net zero emissions as US President Joe Biden holds a climate summit with 40 world leaders on Thursday and Friday.
Mr Morrison said it was “essential” to invest in new technologies that would support Australian industries with lower emissions energy and also support jobs.
“We want to make clean ­energy more affordable and ­reliable, while looking for ways our investments can get more people into work,” he said.
“We cannot pretend the world is not changing. If we do, we run the risk of stranding jobs in this country, especially in regional areas.”
Mr Morrison said Australia’s “technology-first approach” would help the nation meet and beat its Paris Agreement commitment.
The five hydrogen hubs, which are expected to create about 1000 jobs in total, will be decided through a competitive process this year, and announced in early 2022.
Private companies must apply in a consortia with other local or international industry players.
SA has a strong chance as a location with large-scale industrial energy demand, a port facility and renewable energy production nearby.
Word count: 323
