Almost three years ago the Australasian chief executive of Unilever, one of the world’s biggest consumer brands companies, came across a study claiming a halving of meat consumption by consumers around the world would significantly improve the state of the planet.
“That made me think, could we just have a few less meals with meat a week in the family? So we started with that, just everybody having a little more fish, a little more vegetables, a little less meat,’’ she says.
“Before I knew it, I’d taken it out of my diet and become pescetarian. It is small things that can have a ripple effect.”
Her teenage daughter has now followed her lead.
The family’s renovated Sydney home in inner-city Balmain also has water tanks, solar panels and her husband Graeme – who recently completed a master’s degree in environmental science and sustainability – has also purchased a bokashi bin.
It’s an indoor composting container using a Japanese system that literally pickles your waste.
Sparshott says her children – she also has a teenage son – have led the sustainability charge in the household.
“I think that generation almost intuitively realise the importance of making small but meaningful decisions that contribute,” she says.
“So if anything, I find it is the kids that are saying, ‘Are we properly recycling, can we reduce our consumption of meat and increase a plant-based diet, are we making good choices around the house that contribute to the environment?’ It’s just something that is more innate in that generation.”
Her passions at home carry through to her role running Unilever’s Australasian operations, which employ more than 1100 staff in offices and manufacturing facilities and boasts household brands such as Streets, Dove, Rexona and Flora.
A decade ago Unilever’s Dutch chief executive Paul Polman outlined a 10-year Unilever Sustainable Living Plan to double the firm’s revenue while slashing its environmental footprint by 50 per cent and sourcing 100 per cent of its raw materials sustainably.
More recently Polman’s successor, Englishman Alan Jope, has outlined a vision for the company to achieve net zero emissions from all Unilever products by 2039.
Unilever’s brands are also collectively investing €1bn ($1.55bn) over the next decade in a dedicated Climate and Nature Fund.
Green targets
Sparshott joined Unilever Australasia in 2006 as marketing director for foods, ice cream and beverages, before moving to Singapore for a decade, including four years running the global speciality teas business of the consumer brands division.
She returned to Australia at the start of last year.
Her passion for sustainability also carries through to her not-for-profit work – ­she is a director of both the World Wildlife Fund Australia and Global Sisters, a group that supports women to become financially independent through business.
“I really think that particularly as leaders, we have an opportunity and an obligation in the business world to be able to positively contribute not only to growing our businesses, but to do it in a way that has a positive regenerating impact on the planet and has a positive impact on society,” she says.
Speaking ahead of the landmark 26th United Nations Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP26) in Glasgow, she says Australian political leaders must do more than just cutting emissions to net zero by 2050.
The Morrison government’s Emissions Reduction Plan (ERP) released during the week had little detail on the major policy changes needed.
“It’s good to see that we’ve at least committed to a net zero target by 2050. But I think it would also be fair to say that we’re looking for the government to set way more ambitious targets underpinned by a really clear road map with short, medium and long-term milestones, which we have not yet seen,” Sparshott says.
The government’s ERP aims to deliver net zero without inflicting higher taxes, job losses or hurting industry, which means coal or gas production will not be shut down.
“We really need a policy framework that encourages much greater confidence for business to invest in a net zero future through things like carbon pricing or renewable energy incentives and targets and regulations to phase out use of fossil fuels and coal, which we haven’t yet seen the government commit to.”
Sparshott has long believed that impactful climate action can only be realised through public, private and civil society coming together.
It is why she hosted a panel discussion during the week featuring federal independent Zali Steggall and former Wallabies rugby union captain David Pocock, who is the co-founder of FrontRunners, an organisation working with athletes to discuss climate issues.
Covid headwinds
There are many external headwinds impacting the Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) sector in the wake of the Covid pandemic, which threaten to impact the commitment of companies to sustainability issues.
“2020 was tough, 2021 was probably even tougher, and we’re seeing some of the cost headwinds really starting to impact us now. I think 2022 is going to be a time where we’ll really see the full impact of Covid from a supply continuity point of view, in a business environment sense,” she says.
“We’ve seen (cost escalation) in freight, access to containers, the ability of getting product in and out of the country easily and access to raw materials.”
While Unilever is doing its best to remove non-value-added costs, Sparshott says higher costs across the supply chain will inevitably hit consumers in the form of increased prices in the year ahead.
But she is determined that despite the Covid headwinds, Unilever will not take its foot off the sustainability accelerator.
In January 2020 the firm moved to 100 per cent renewable electricity consumption following the signing of a five-year power purchase agreement with energy retailer Red Energy, which supports wind and solar farms in NSW, Victoria and South Australia. Now Unilever is looking at electrifying more processes, including exploring alternatives to using gas for heating.
For example it is now using solar thermal energy in its Tatura factory in Victoria, reducing CO2 emissions by 300 tonnes each year.
In 2017 Unilever joined The Climate Group’s EV100 global initiative, where it committed to a phased integration of electric vehicles into the fleets it owned or leased.
In February last year it shifted its entire New Zealand fleet to hybrids, resulting in a 43 per cent reduction in emissions compared to 2018.
The firm has also shifted about a third of its Australian fleet to hybrids, with the aim to get to 100 per cent by the end of 2022.
For heavy vehicles, it is taking steps to increase truck and container utilisation to reduce the number of trucks on the road and ships at sea, as well as prioritising rail transport over road.
Significant hurdles remain to reduce virgin plastic use for a company like Unilever, which provides food and home and personal care to millions of households.
But in addition to replacing fossil fuel-based ingredients in plastic laundry products, the firm has this year opened its first-ever laundry refillery at a Coles supermarket at Moonee Ponds in Melbourne, allowing shoppers to refill their old bottles of Omo and Surf laundry liquid. The venture with Coles, which looks set to be expanded, saves about 20 plastic bottles each week, the equivalent of around 500 plastic bags.
“It has been really well received by consumers. For both Coles and us, we have been very pleased with the results of that trial. We are very much in the mindset of experimentation,’’ Sparshott says.
At the end of the day, she says the initiatives across the company and more broadly the FMCG sector are being driven by a sea-change in the mindset of customers, despite the challenges presented by Covid.
“One of the things that may have been unsurprising would have been to see a relaxing of people’s interest over the Covid pandemic for products that are sustainably produced. But if anything we’ve seen the reverse to be true,” she says.
“There is much more of a desire to make better choices in that regard.
“We are seeing a groundswell of consumer support and shopper sentiment around wanting to access better choices when it comes to buying products that have been sustainably produced.”
Word count: 1325
