The Morrison government has agreed to take on the total 80 recommendations of the findings of the bushfire Royal Commission, which is a major step towards bushfire preparedness. We expect this commonsense from Scott Morrison. Similar pragmatism now needs to be applied to the nation’s water infrastructure.
The government’s climate and energy strategies are based on critical technological advancements, to be primarily developed by private enterprise and which would improve both energy efficiencies and economic growth. This pragmatic approach is far safer to a strategy based on yet another model underpinned by untested assumptions supporting idealistic outcomes.
Ron Hobba, Camberwell, Vic.
The Deloitte report is crucial because it highlights bluntly how the economy can no longer ignore the looming climate crisis. For decades, climate change has been framed as a separate (and minor) issue from job creation and the economy; that climate change is a topic for the “greenies”. This could not be further from the truth. The warming planet is going to affect our lives in every single way, ranging from our health, food and water security, ability to work outside, to property insurability.
It is not practical to continue to pin Australia’s economy to the fossil fuel industry when global demand is declining as the rest of the world transitions towards clean renewable energy. And it is not practical to continue propping up dirty, heavy carbon-emitting industries that pollute our air and water. The report is a wake-up call for every Australian.
Ching Ang, Kensington Gardens, SA
Your editorial regarding the recommendations handed down from the Royal Commission into Natural Disaster Arrangements (“Acting on the hard lessons of Black Summer infernos”, 31/10-1/11) is not only timely but also highlights the most urgent need for the devolution of decision making away from state governments and the mantle taken up by the Federal Government.
Natural disasters come in many forms and do not recognise borders or lines drawn on a map. The only way forward is for the establishment of a federal agency to manage impacts from significant events from their inception.
The Queensland Disaster Management Arrangements protocol is catalysed initially by local then state and federal governments qualified by community needs.
Early assessment and if necessary activations by a federal agency having a holistic overview and authority could only have more rapid aid and support measures than exists currently.
Mike Flanigan, Senior Adviser in Emergency Management to Local Government, Toowoomba, Qld
By return post
Why was Scott Morrison so angry with Christine Holgate of Australia Post?
Watches are surely bonuses in a different form.
The anger expressed over this seems an over-reaction. Morrison should be making James Shipton, the chairman of ASIC go over allegations of $118,000 in relocation expenses. That’s a far more serious position for accountability and correct behaviour.
Is it jobs for the boys?
Claire Brittain, Claremont, WA
Word count: 456
