A hydroponic business was born from a lightbulb moment, writes SARAH HUDSON IAIN Reynolds was an aerospace engineer working on new technologies such as carbon fibre and kevlar when a mate told him about hydroponics.
“It was the early ’90s and I hadn’t heard of the growing method before,” British-born Iain recalled.
“He said it was a technology that would feed the world. I bought the equipment and started growing tomatoes in my backyard.
“When I saw growth at 1mm an hour under lights, I was hooked.” Iain quit his job, and with a couple of business partners established HydroGarden, now one of the UK’s leading manufacturers and distributors of hydroponic equipment and services.
While Iain continues to be a shareholder in the company — which employs 100 people and has 2000 product lines — in the early 2000s he and his wife Mandy wanted to live the life of a hydroponic grower, and moved to the NSW town of Burringbar, north of Byron Bay.
In 2008 the Reynolds created Pocket Herbs and Produce, now growing about 120 lines — in microgreens, edible flowers and bushfoods — selling to chefs and the food services industry north to Brisbane, and south as far as Melbourne and Adelaide, employing 20 staff.
About three-quarters of sales are microgreens, with the best-selling including red shiso, lemon balm, and red veined sorrel, for which they sell about 1700 boxes (each with 12 punnets) a week.
Best-selling edible flowers include viola, society garlic, and marigolds. Initially Pocket Herbs and Produce grew 40 mic­rogreen products out of a small greenhouse that used Nutrient Film Technique technology to pump water and nutrients 12 hours a day to plants.
But in 2017 the couple invested $2 million to establish three greenhouses totalling almost 4000 square metres, using ebb and flow or a flood and drain system — an intermittent water flow over plants via drip irrigation twice a day, which saves on power costs.
JUST ADD WATER RAINWATER is collected from roofs and stored in a dam, although for the first time in their farming experience, the Reynolds trucked in water in November after running out because of the drought.
Iain said the new greenhouses were “medium tech”, using New Zealand Autogrow computer-controlled technology to move roof vents, side walls, shade screens and airflow. As each variety of plant has different growing needs, Iain aims for an average 25C, good airflow and diffused sunlight. Plants are grown on moving benches, which maximise space for high yields.
The greenhouses also have 42KW of solar power, with surplus energy going back to the grid, while they also have composting toilets for staff (“no, they don’t help the plants, it’s just part of our philosophy”).
Initial plans to use waste oil and macadamia shells in winter for heating were not successful and so now they use a diesel-powered water heater.
The innovation has continued, just this year starting a trial with researchers from Southern Cross University investigating ways to grow salt-tolerant bushfoods hydroponically.
Iain said he introduced the salt-tolerant bushfoods line earlier this year, currently selling six varieties including samphire and warrigal greens, but with 20 varieties being investigated.
“I could see microgreens had peaked and there was a developing market for bushfoods, especially for foraged foods.
“However with foraged foods there is a food safety quality issue, and also it’s not sustainable if everyone is going out picking wild produce.” SCIENTIFIC APPROACH RESEARCHERS now visit the Reynolds’ farm each week to take samples of varieties, examining not only their nutritional content, but also how to grow them.
“Chefs want a product that tastes salty and from a business perspective we want high yields, so it’s about making a commercially viable product.” Pocket Herbs and Produce plants are accredited with the Australian on-farm assurance program, Freshcare, as well as HACCP food safety certified, with all plants grown in a coia media.
Microgreens are grown from seed, germinated in a hot room, before growing out in 9cm pots, then sold in those pots, taking about a month from seed to sale.
All other plants are freshly cut and sold in punnets sized from 10g-75g. Iain said the benefit of hydroponics was that “generally” it was spray free and low input.
Aside from fertigation, which supplies nutrients to plants, Pocket Herbs and Produce plants are low input, relying on beneficial insects to battle aphids, and beneficial bacteria to minimise disease risk.
While technology has evolved in the past three decades Iain said hydroponics had a key role to play in feeding the world.
“It can conserve water, doesn’t need soil or sprays for insects or pesticides and it’s got a small footprint, especially vertical farming.
“It’s about man­ipulating the growing conditions, the temperature, humidity, nutrients, CO2, to generate faster growth.” Iain said the Dutch led the world in hydroponic technology, especially with enclosed vertical farms using purple LED lights.
He said he didn’t regret throwing in his aerospace engineering career because hydroponic farming was all about “problem solving”.
“I’m more of an entrepreneur and I like innovation and doing things differently, trying new things.”
IAIN REYNOLDS BURRINGBAR, NSW FORMER aerospace engineer RUNS Pocket Herbs and Produce GROW 120 lines of microgreens, edible flowers and bushfoodsINVESTED $2 million in three greenhouses
CREDIT: SARAH HUDSON
Word count: 880
