A sale will likely reap the global investment group more than $500m.
Elliott owns Elliott Green Power Australia, which consists of solar energy assets that generate more than 300 megawatts of solar power.
Its projects include the Susan River Solar Farm in Queensland that delivers 180,000 annual megawatt-hours of electricity, along with the Childers Solar Farm and Nevertire Solar farms in NSW that deliver 144,000MWh of power annually and 265,000MWh respectively.
Elliott Green Power declined to comment on its plans but there is talk in the market that the company is expected to be placed up for sale early next year.
Elliott Management manages two multi-strategy hedge funds which collectively have more than $US40bn ($54.8bn) worth of assets under management.
Investors include pension plans, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, foundations, funds of funds, high net worth individuals and families and employees of the firm.
Should the assets come up for sale in the coming months, the sales process will likely join other portfolios on the market, including New Energy Solar.
New Energy Solar is selling its Australian solar energy assets through the Royal Bank of Canada, including its 110MW Beryl plan and 55MW Manildra facilities in NSW.
Groups that have earlier picked up renewable energy portfolios include First Sentier, Palisade Investment Partners, Lighthouse Infrastructure, Dutch Infrastructure Fund and ICG and they are expected to be in the mix for the solar farms.
Others for sale include BlackRock’s two solar farms in Queensland, known as The Gretel Solar Portfolio, that are on offer through Azure Capital and could be worth $300m.
A 49 per cent stake in an Australian portfolio owned by Fotowatio Renewable Ventures that could be worth about $500m is also for sale. FRV describes itself as a leading global developer of large-scale solar power plants and the assets on offer generate about 500MW of power.
Also up for sale through advisory firm Lazard is a 54 per cent stake in the $450m Ararat Wind Farm in Victoria, which is owned by Partners Group. The sales process is expected to start shortly and conclude by March. The owner of the remaining stake is OP Trust.
It comes after other buyers have recently been picking up wind farms.
This includes First Sentier, which acquired John Laing’s Australian wind farms for $285m before disposal costs and Infrastructure Capital Group, which bought Engie’s Willogoleche Wind Farm in South Australia and secured other development opportunities from Engie for $400m.
Analysts believe that sellers may be eager to offload solar energy assets ahead of additional supply coming into the market, which may deflate asset prices.
Word count: 416
