It’s not enough for ministers to reassure people that it won’t ever come to that because it did, albeit only for a day, in South Australia in 2016, when all the wind turbines had to close and the interconnector failed; and it might in Britain this winter, if there’s no gas and the French get nasty about providing access to their (largely nuclear) grid.
While the Morrison government’s new gas-fired power station in the Hunter Valley is probably enough to maintain power after the retirement of the Liddell coal-fired power station in two years, there is currently no viable plan for 24/7 power once the other coal-fired stations that still produce almost 70 per cent of the east coast’s electricity start to close towards the end of this decade.
There’s much talk about hydrogen, but that’s all it is — talk, plus billions in research grants that might never produce a viable alternative to existing baseload power.
And herein lies the problem: wind and solar power is cheap, but only when the wind is blowing and the sun is shining, and we need power all the time.
Investors are falling over themselves to start new wind and solar farms because consumer subsidies make them a licence to print money (even if the goods mostly come from China); but no one is investing in the 24/7 baseload capacity we need (and once had in abundance) because of economic and political risk.
The Prime Minister was right when he said at the beginning of the year that he wouldn’t commit to “net zero by 2050” without a costed plan to get there.
The pressure is on now, though, from woke billionaires, “modern (left) Liberals” in wealthy seats, virtue-signalling CEOs, and even from his own Treasurer, who’s claimed that no one will lend us money, to say “what the heck”, sign a cheque that won’t be cashed for three decades; and jump on a plane to Glasgow and bask in applause as a born-again green.
But, here are just three problems with striking a pose and not knowing how to pay for it.
NED-4663-Aus-attitudes-to-nuclear-power
First, the “permanent government” of bureaucrats, who remain while politicians come and go, will start implementing any such commitment from now (even if it wasn’t yet meant to be taken seriously).
Second, it would make a mockery of Scott Morrison’s claims before the previous election that Labor’s much more modest (45 per cent by 2030) proposal would cut wages by $9000, destroy more than 300,000 jobs and cost nearly half a trillion dollars.
And third, it would produce a surge of support for the populist splinter parties that are the biggest threat to the Coalition’s prospects of winning next year’s election.
Bob Katter says that adopting net zero would be “criminally insane as there are only three industries of significance in Queensland: coal, cane and cattle”.
Craig Kelly says that “we shouldn’t sign up to anything that will put our economy at a disadvantage with China”.
Pauline Hanson says that she’s “totally opposed” to net zero.
And Campbell Newman says “with every breath in my body … I’ll be fighting against it”. These are the people who would make inroads into the Coalition’s vote, regardless of any sweeteners for regional electorates that Barnaby Joyce might win as a sop for agreeing to net zero.
And if you think they’re just ratbags, last Monday’s Newspoll showed that 26 per cent of the vote is now parked away from the Coalition and Labor.
NED-4669-where-aus-elec-comes-from
Seeking a fourth term, with a wafer-thin majority, and an unfavourable redistribution, the Morrison government simply can’t afford to lose votes to conservative splinter parties that don’t always come back as preferences (unlike Greens preferences, which come back to Labor around 80 per cent of the time).
So what does the Prime Minister do, given his National Press Club promise back in February not to commit to a further climate target that he can’t cost?
Could his delay in producing a net zero road map mean that it’s technically doubtful and horrifically expensive? I suspect that’s true, just as much as it’s the Nationals playing hardball.
The British Treasury reportedly put the cost of net zero at over a trillion pounds.
A New Zealand study put the cost at upwards of 16 per cent of GDP.
Without giving up meat and without giving up manufacturing, it’s hard to see how net zero could be feasible across much of the economy.
We can offset air miles but hardly anyone does. We could largely eliminate emissions from land transport at considerable cost and inconvenience by going electric but, with existing technology, that would mean embracing nuclear as the only proven form of emissions-free baseload power.
The Prime Minister could readily dispatch his ministers to Glasgow to argue that Australia is more interested in performance than in promises, and that the 20 per cent cut we have already achieved since 2005 is better than the US and much better than climate darlings New Zealand and Canada.
But if he really has become a convert to net zero, he will still need a fair-dinkum plan that will keep the lights on as well as reduce emissions.
If we can have nuclear reactors at sea, why not on land too?
Rather than just throw a bucket of borrowed cash at the National Party, if he was smart the Prime Minister would realise that going nuclear would both secure baseload energy for Australia’s future and at least have him fighting with the Labor Party rather than his own side.
Watch Peta on Credlin on Sky News, weeknights at 6pm
Word count: 907
