The projects are already built or under construction and will join two new pumped hydro-electric plants - one west of Mackay and the other a Borumba Dam (set to be built by 2035) to help power Queensland’s $62bn super grid.
1. Baking Board Solar Farm
The Baking Board project, 7km northwest of Chinchilla in the Western Downs Region of South East Queensland, comprises 61,000 solar panels over 73ha.
Stralis Energy, an Australian electrical distribution and solar service provider, was contracted by German-owned company Gildemeister LSG Solar Australia to install the solar panels.
The project injected 90 jobs into the local economy.
For more information, visit stralisenergy.com.au/project-item/
2. Barcaldine Remote Community Solar Farm (BRCSF)
This solar farm covers 90ha hand comprises 79,000 solar panels in Barcaldine in Central West Queensland.
The site generates about 53,500 megawatt hours of renewable energy each year, with each panel able to tilt in the direction of the sun to maximise total energy generated.
The project expands Ergon Energy’s grid into Central Queensland.
For more information, visit arena.gov.au
3. Childers Solar Farm
The Childers Solar farm, 65km south of Bundaberg in Queensland’s Wide Bay – Burnett region, is also connected to Ergon Energy’s network, as a subsidiary of Queensland Energy.
Covering 180ha of land, the farm supplies clean energy to about 30,000 households.
For more information, visit escopacific.com.au/projects/
4. Clare Solar farm
The Clare Solar Farm, 35km from Ayr in North Queensland, covers 300ha and supplies clean energy to 45,000 homes.
It was the first solar power site in Australia to attain funding via the Power Purchasing Agreement (PPA), meaning it was agreed upon between an independent owner (FRV Services Australia) and the energy supplier (Origin Energy) without any additional government funding.
For more information, visit frv.com/en
5. Clermont Solar Farm (Stage One)
The Clermont Solar Farm, north of Emerald in Central Queensland, covers an area of 201ha and was a project that cost about $180 million.
Delivering renewable energy to about 31,000 homes, the initial developer, Epuron Energy, sold the farm to Wirsol Energy in December 2017.
For more information, visit power-technology.com
6. Collinsville Solar Farm
The Collinsville Solar farm is about 90km from Bowen in Queensland’s Whitsunday region. It was built on the site of the decommissioned 180 megawatt coal-fired Collinsville Power Station, which operated until December 2012.
The solar farm includes 180,000 ground-mounted solar panels and is estimated to produce enough electricity to power 15,000 homes.
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC), an investor with efforts centred on funding renewable energy projects, committed $60 million to the project. The solar farm has a power purchase agreement with Alinta Energy for up to 70 per cent of the generated solar capacity.
For more information, visit cefc.com.au
7. Coopers Gap Wind Farm
The Coopers Gap Wind Farm, 65km north of Dalby, in the Darling Downs region, was momentarily the largest wind farm in Australia.
Covering 10,200ha, the farm is operated by AGL, Australia’s largest electricity generator, and is anticipated to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by up to 2.2 million tons annually. It powers about 232,000 Australian homes.
For more information, visit agl.com.au
8. Darling Downs Solar Farm
Featuring 430,000 solar panels and generating enough energy to power 30,000 homes, the Darling Downs Solar Farm in Kogan in Queensland’s south-west was partly funded by the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA).
Covering 200ha, the plant will continue to sell its energy directly to Origin, a major Australian electricity retailer, until 2030. It is owned by APA Group, Australia’s largest natural gas manufacturer.
For more information, visit arena.gov.au
9. Daydream Solar Farm
Developed and managed by Edify Energy, an Australian renewable energy development company, Daydream Solar Farm in the Whitsunday region comprises 1.5 million solar panels on its site north of Collinsville.
Covering more than 405ha, it supplies energy directly to Origin.
For more information, visit edifyenergy.com
10. Dunblane Solar Farm
Dunblane Solar Farm in Central Queensland was privately funded and most of its workers are locals who have been employed and trained to manage the farm.
The project supplies clean energy to about 1400 households. It is owned by YD Projects, an Australian solar manufacturer.
For more information, visit reneweconomy.com.au
11. Emerald Solar park
The Emerald Solar Park in Emerald in the Central Queensland region provides power to about 35,000 homes and is anticipated to reduce Carbon dioxide (Co2) emissions by 130,000 tons annually. All of the energy produced is expected to be supplied to Telstra, Australia’s largest telecommunications company.
For more information, visit emerald-solar.com.au
12. Gangarri Solar Farm
Generating enough electricity to power 50,000 homes in the Darling Downs region, the Gangarri solar farm in Woleebee, not far from Wandoan, is owned and managed by Shell Energy. It has about 330,000 solar panels.
For more information, visit shell.com.au
13. Hamilton Solar Farm
Hamilton Solar Farm is also near Collinsville, in the Whitsunday region, and powers 31,000 homes, saving 115,200 C02 emissions yearly.
Partly funded by the Whitsunday Regional Council, the farm is jointly managed by Edify, an Australian renewable energy company and Wirsol, a German solar energy provider.
For more information, visit edifyenergy.com
14. Haughton Solar Farm (Stage One)
Haughton Solar Farm in Upper Haughton in the Burdekin Shire generates enough electricity to power about 58,000 homes. The plant is owned by Pacific Hydro, a subsidiary of China’s State Power investment corporation.
The first stage of the 100MW of the project opened in 2019.
When complete, Haughton Solar Farm is expected to have a generating capacity of up to 500MW, enough to power about 291,000 homes.
For more information, visit pacifichydro.com.au
15. Hayman Solar Farm
Part of the Whitsunday solar farms network owned by Edify Energy, the Hayman Solar farm, near Collinsville, delivers renewable energy to about 23,131 homes and saves 107,200 tons of CO2 per annum.
The farm is near the sister ‘island’ solar farms, Whitsunday, Daydream and Hamilton.
For more information, visit edifyenergy.com/project
NED-7265-Qld coal fired gas station closures
16. Hughenden Solar Farm
Spread over 34ha, the Hughenden solar farm, in the Flinders Shire of north-western Queensland supplies enough clean energy to power about 6,800 households.
It comprises 60,000 panels and is operated by Lighthouse Infrastructure, an Australian infrastructure investor.
For more information, visit baywa-re.com.au
17. Kennedy Energy Park
The hybrid renewable energy site near Hughenden, in the Flinders region was commissioned as part of a project to decrease North Queensland’s reliance on energy generated in southern parts of the state.
The park plans to use both wind and solar energy generation, and was partly funded by ARENA. It is owned by Windlab Energy, an Australian energy asset management company, and the Japanese-owned Eurus Energy Australia.
If successfully developed, it is anticipated to include up to 1200MW of solar and wind with the potential for multiple storage options including large-scale battery and regional pumped hydro storage for the region.
For more information, visit arena.gov.au
18. Kidston Solar Project (Phase One)
Owned by Genex Power, an Australian electricity generation company, the Kidston Solar project is in Kidston, near Einasleigh in Etheridge Shire in Far North Queensland.
It is part of the 12 solar farm projects that received $100 million in state funding and involves the development of two solar farms on the site of the historical Kidston Gold Mine.
This site was selected in order to take advantage of the highest solar radiation zone in the country. The project has 540,000 solar panels, with phase one of the project powering about 26,500 homes. It is the first of four projects that comprise the Kidston Clean Energy Hub that will also include a wind project.
For more information, visit arena.gov.au/projects
19. Lakeland Solar Farm
Supplying the Cook Shire, the Lakeland-based solar farm is a world first in integrating large-scale solar energy and battery storage technology to overcome the challenges of supplying constant energy to the fringes of Queensland’s energy grid. Owned by Conergy Australia, the solar farm was allocated $17.4 million in funding by ARENA.
For more information, visit arena.gov.au/projects
20. Lilyvale Solar Farm
Covering 396ha, the Lilyvale Solar Farm, near Tieri in Central Queensland, supplies energy to about 70,500 households and offsets 180,630 tons of Co2 a year. The project is owned by FRV Services, an Australian renewable energy provider.
For more information, visit lilyvalesolarfarm.com.au
NED-4650-Valuing-Mission-Zero
21. Longreach Solar Farm
Developed by Canadian Solar, Longreach Solar Farm comprises 53,000 solar modules and delivers renewable energy to about 5000 homes in the central west Queensland area. It was allocated $1.3 million by ARENA.
For more information, visit arena.gov.au/projects
22. Brigalow Solar Farm
Covering 40ha, Brigalow Solar Farm in Yarranlea, near Pittsworth, on the Darling Downs, powers about 10,500 households and offsets 56,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions annually. Commissioned in March 2020, it is now owned by Maryborough Solar.
For more information, visit power-technology.com/marketdata
23. Middlemount Sun Farm
Originally developed by Overland Sun Farming, the site, in Middlemount in the Isaac Region, provides energy to power about 24,000 households. It is now owned by SUSI Partners, a Swiss renewable energy investor.
For more information, visit power-technology.com
24. Mt Emerald Wind Farm
Comprising 53 wind turbines, the Mt Emerald Wind Farm, near Walkamin in Far North Queensland, powers more than 75,000 homes and reduces 450,000 tons of CO2 emissions per annum. It is owned by RATCH, an investment group made of companies across Australia and South East Asia.
For more information, visit mtemeraldwindfarm.com.au
25. Normanton Solar Farm
Completed in December 2021, this solar farm sits on 10ha near Normanton, in north-west Queensland’s Carpentaria Shire. It is part of Ergon Energy’s Queensland electricity grid and is operated by Canadian Solar. It was allocated $8.4 million in government funding.
For more information, visit normantonsolarfarm.com.au
26. Oakey Solar Farm (One)
The Oakey Solar Farm near Oakey, on the Darling Downs, connects the Ergon Energy network to Toowoomba and its surrounding areas. With 205,920 panels, it powers more than 24,000 homes, and had a value of $475M. It is owned by Canadian Solar.
27. Oakey Solar Farm (Two)
The expansion of the Oakey Solar Farm allowed it to accommodate 206,000 solar panels, strengthening Ergon Energy’s network in South East Queensland.
For more information, visit diamondenergy.com.au/oakey-2/
28. Ross River Solar Farm
The North Queensland-based Ross River Solar Farm comprises 413,300 solar panels and provides renewable energy for up to 54,000 homes, mainly in Townsville. Covering 202ha , the solar farm was acquired by Palisade Investment Partners, an Australian infrastructure investor.
For more information, visit rossriversolarfarm.com.au
29. Rugby Run Solar Farm
Situated near Moranbah in Central Queensland, the Rugby Run Solar Farm houses 247,000 panels and was entirely self-financed by Adani, an Indian energy infrastructure company, as part of their efforts to expand into the Australian energy sector.
For more information, visit t2energy.com.au/projects
30. Sun Metals Solar farm
The Sun Metals Solar Farm, near Townsville in North Queensland, supplies energy to the nearby Sun Metals zinc refinery as well as exporting to the National Energy market.
With more than one million panels, it is the largest capacity solar farm in Queensland.
For more information, visit sunmetals.com.au
31. Sunshine Coast Solar Farm
Owned and operated entirely by the Sunshine Coast Council, this solar farm, which sits on 24ha in Valdora, has 58,000 panels and was commissioned in an effort to reduce the southeast region’s electricity consumption.
It is operated and monitored by Energex, a state-owned electricity supplier and Diamond Energy, an Australian renewable energy retailer.
For more information, visit sunshinecoast.qld.gov.au
NED-4697 Australia's Greenhouse Gas Emissions by sector
32. Susan River Solar Farm
The Susan River Solar Farm, outside of Hervey Bay covers 176ha and is owned by Elliott Green Power, an Australian solar provider, with the energy being distributed as part of Ergon’s network. It provides power to more than 34,000 Australian homes.
For more information, visit escopacific.com.au/projects
33. Warwick Solar Farm
Funded and developed by Brisbane’s University of Queensland, the solar farm, in Warwick on the Darling Downs, was commissioned as part of UQ’s commitment to achieving 100 per cent sustainability. Covering 154ha, energy from the site will be distributed by Ergon to UQ’s campuses and areas in the South Eastern power grid.
For more information, visit sustainability.uq.edu.au
34. Whitsunday Solar Farm
Owned by a partnership between Edify and Wirsol Energy, the Whitsunday Solar Farm, near Collinsville, saves 115,200 tons of Co2 emissions annually and powers 31,000 homes in the Whitsunday region.
For more information, visit edifyenergy.com/project
35. Woolooga Solar Farm
Covering 500ha of land, this solar farm near Gympie powers 63,150 homes and saves 350,400 tons of CO2 emissions annually. It is operated by Lightsource BP, Europe’s largest solar developer and the renewable energy subsidiary of BP.
For more information, visit lightsourcebp.com/au/projects
36. Yarranlea Solar Farm
The Yarranlea solar farm is about 50km west of Toowoomba on the Darling Downs and powers 32,000 homes in the region via Ergon energy’s infrastructure. With an operating life of 30 years, Risen Energy, a Chinese Energy retailer, plans to decommission the farm at the end of its lifespan and return the land to agricultural use.
For more information, visit riseenergy.com.au/portfolio
37. Blue Grass Solar Farm
The Blue Grass solar Farm being developed near Chinchilla on the Western Downs is estimated to be sufficient to power about 80,000 homes. Hoping to offset more than 320,000 tons of Co2 emissions a year when finished, X-ELIO, a Spanish renewable energy manufacturer, has invested more than $200 million into the project with additional support from state and local governments.
For more information, visit x-elios.com
38. Clarke Creek Wind and Solar Farm
The hybrid farm, in Clark Creek in Central Queensland’s Isaac Region, is estimated to produce enough wind and solar energy to power about 660,000 homes, while also exporting to the National Electricity Market at a reduced cost.
The first stage of the project is the building of 100 wind turbines, and once completed the farm is estimated to reduce Co2 emissions by 2.7 million tonnes annually. It is owned by Squadron Energy, an Australian owned renewable energy distributor.
For more information, visit squadronenergy.com
39. Columboola Solar Farm
Sitting on 410 hectares outside of Miles in the Western Downs region, the Columboola solar farm is expected to be completed this year, with enough energy to power 75,000 homes.
With the construction of 407,000 panels, CS Energy, an energy retailer owned by the Queensland Government, has already agreed to buy 100 per cent of the solar farm’s renewable energy generation upon its completion.
For more information, visit columboolasolarfarm.com.au
40. Dulacca Renewable Energy Project
This wind farm, near Dulacca in the Western Downs, is expected to consist of 43 wind turbines and generate 150 local jobs for the region. It is part of the Queensland Government’s vision to be 50 per cent renewable by 2030, and will generate enough power for 124,000 homes.
It is owned by Octopus Energy, a British renewable energy group and is due for completion in the third quarter of 2023.
For more information, visit dulaccawindfarm.com.au
41. Edenvale Solar Park
The Edenvale Solar Park is under construction outside of Chinchilla in the Darling Downs region by Japanese coal mining companies Sojitz and Eneos.
The two companies already operate several mines in Queensland and are adding a supply of renewable energy to their sites. The solar farm is a 204 megawatt farm and will also sell its output to Mojo Electricity, an Australian renewable energy distributor.
For more information, visit edenvalesolarpark.com
42. Kaban Green Powerhub
The Power hub has been built in Ravenshoe in the Atherton Tablelands in Far North Queensland and will have 28 wind turbines which will power homes from Cairns to Townsville.
It consists of a 157 MW wind farm with approval for a 100 MW battery, and a network upgrade.
The project has a power purchase agreement with CleanCo to provide energy in support of Queensland’s energy target.
For more information, visit kabangreenpowerhub.com.au
43. Karara Wind Farm
Valued at $2 billion and expected to create 620 local jobs, the 103 megawatt Karara Wind Farm in the Southern Downs region aims to be Queensland’s first publicly-owned and operated wind farm.
With the capacity to power 700,000 homes, the wind farm will substantially boost Queensland’s renewable energy supply. The farm is owned by CleanCo, an Queensland Government owned electricity retailer.
For more information, visit statements.qld.gov.au
44. Macintyre Wind Farm (Stage One)
The $1.96 billion Macintyre Wind Farm, southwest of Warwick on the Darling Downs, has been commissioned in two stages.
Stage One will consist of the construction of the turbines, to be operated in a partnership between the Queensland Government and Acciona Energy, a subsidiary of the Spanish infrastructure conglomerate Acciona.
Once operational the MacIntyre Wind Farm Precinct is expected to generate enough renewable electricity to supply about 700,000 Queensland homes.
The Karara Wind Farm (listed above) will form part of the MacIntyre Wind Farm is owned by CleanCo.
For more information, visit acciona.com.au/projects
45. Macintyre Wind Farm, (Stage Two)
Stage Two will oversee the completion and testing of the Macintyre Wind Farm that will be owned by Acciona Energy. Testing is expected to occur after the initial construction is completed in 2025.
For more information, visit statements.qld.gov.au
46. Mica Creek solar Farm, (Stage One)
To be constructed in Mt Isa in the Gulf Country Region, stage one of the Mica Creek Solar Farm will have the farm’s capacity at 44MW. The farm is owned by APA Group.
For more information, visit statedevelopment.qld.gov.au
47. Mica Creek Solar Farm (Stage Two)
With the end of Stage Two expected to be completed by late 2023, Mica Creek will see its energy output potential doubled to 88MW.
The solar farm is part of larger efforts to bring renewables into Queensland’s minerals trade, reducing their overall footprint.
For more information, visit statedevelopment.qld.gov.au
48. Moura Solar Farm
Covering an area of about 203ha the solar farm, near Banana in Central Queensland, will generate enough electricity to power 43,000 homes. With a targeted completion date of late 2022 the solar farm is expected to boost renewable energy availability in Central Queensland over its 30-50 year projected lifespan.
The farm is owned by Mytilineos, a Greek energy manufacturer.
For more information, visit mourasolar.com.au
49. Tableland Green Energy Power Plant
Developed by MSF Sugar, the $86 million green energy plant in Far North Queensland intends to convert sugarcane fibers into 100 per cent renewable energy.
With the first step of establishing a trial farm complete, MSF Sugar is testing the plant’s suitability for harvesting and processing. The power plant will produce 24 megawatts of electricity and is expected to be able to power 26,300 homes as part of Ergon’s northern energy grid.
For more information, visit msfsugar.com.au
50. Western Downs Green Power Hub
The Western Downs Green Power Hub is expected to be completed in 2024 and will cover 1545ha of land.
It is a solar farm with 460MW of installed solar panels - set to be Australia’s largest operating solar farm.
The site holds up to 200MW battery storage potential.
A project valued at over $600m, it is listed under Neoen energy, a French renewable energy provider, and has been financed by a partnership of various banks, including Commonwealth Bank and Societe Generale.
For more information, visit westerndownsgreenpowerhub.com.au
Word count: 2992
