There is no place people can go to have respite. At night, hundreds of these hungry things scamper across the floor and over your feet. When you go to bed you want to sleep just to be free of them for a few hours but you can’t because they get into your bed and run across your face. The smell is atrocious. The conditions farmers have to tolerate could be enough to tip them over the edge and take their own lives.
Lizzie Haydon, Runcorn, Qld
Then there are the ’roos
Emotive (in fact indirectly cruel) media campaigns are being waged against absolutely necessary, professionally and humanely carried-out kangaroo culls, including fallacious claims of gene-pool dilutions (which testosterone-loaded roaming junior Old Man buck kangaroos soon put paid to).
It’s my contention that there are more kangaroos in Australia today than before European settlement. Am I wrong to contend that the proliferation of water bores, dams, irrigation channels and irrigated pastures in the outer reaches of Australia have brought water and food for the kangaroo where there never was any of either before? Having seen kangaroos in plague proportions a number of times, I say farmers, housing estate developers, sporting clubs and municipalities are ensuring very healthy numbers of very healthy kangaroos within their own boundaries.
Howard Hutchins, Chirnside Park, Vic
Climate tales
Praise be to Grant King (“Climate Change Authority chair Grant King backs nuclear power”, 4/6). Activists such as Zali Steggall and her ABC friends pretend batteries and battery-like technologies can complement renewable energy to solve the so-called climate emergency. Such thinking is unique to Australia. Every other G20 country uses nuclear energy, and those that have adopted the net-zero emissions target by 2050 intend to increase that use.
Canada is an example. Its government is investing $40 million to help build a reactor that recycles existing used nuclear fuel, thereby reducing the waste storage problem. The reactor will operate at ambient temperature, avoiding the risk of pressure build-ups. It will also run at high temperature and feed thermal storage that can be used to generate energy when the wind and sun can’t. Fission products are locked in molten salt, avoiding the risk of radioactive emissions. Foreign governments may well pressure Australia to move away from fossil fuel use. Those same governments will ask why Australia won’t face up to the reality that net zero by 2050 without using nuclear energy is a pipe dream.
Wally McColl, Roseville, NSW
In a recent speech Scott Morrison tried to insist that Anthony Albanese could be believed as supporting the mining sector only if Labor agreed with the government’s new environmental “streamlining approvals process” (“Mines bosses told: don’t trust ALP on resources”, 4/6).
What absolute garbage. Mr Albanese’s speech was clear that decarbonising is our realistic future, and lithium and other types of mining contribute enormously to our bright economic future, industries and jobs. As usual, Mr Morrison is loose with the facts and I’m sure keen-minded miners can easily see through this prime minister.
Barbara Fraser, Burwood, Vic
There are days when the average citizen must feel they have stumbled dazed into a surreal landscape envisaged by Salvador Dali. From the Victorian government hunting to slay a “beast” masquerading as a virus and in the process transforming itself into an extortion racket preying on the hapless federal government, to a judge invoking apocalyptic scenarios for Australia’s children should a coalmine’s lease be extended (“Coal ruling undermines democracy, prosperity”, 4/6) the ability to reason is becoming a scarce commodity indeed. It appears that Mordecai Bromberg has consulted the world’s foremost teenage climate expert and futurologist, the great Greta herself, in formulating his judgment.
As the sagacious Henry Ergas has pointed out, the good judge should really be encouraging the extinctionistas to sue the Chinese government since China is accountable for a quarter of “emissions” worldwide.
The fact that, should the minister revoke Whitehaven’s coal licence to operate, the con­sequences on the Earth’s CO2 levels would be unmeasurable, is a leap of logic that is lost on those who wish to further their planet-saving endeavours through the courts rather than parliament. The time to panic will be when clocks in true Daliesque fashion start sliding off walls.
Ashley Georgeson, Cumberland Park, SA
Word count: 694
