Having pushed ahead with more than 20 deals, including the $190m acquisition of RM Williams boot company, Hagger is set to step up the investments by the Forrest family company Tattarang, which will get another $1.6bn in dividends from its 36 per cent stake in Fortescue Metals next month.
Hagger and his team will build on the momentum created by other deals such as an investment in nickel projects in Canada, solar energy project Sun Cable with ­Atlassian co-founder Michael Cannon-Brookes, a $250m LNG receiving terminal in Port Kembla that will bring gas from around Australia to the NSW east coast, an office building in Perth’s St George’s Terrace, cattle properties and an oyster farm in Western Australia and fintech payments company Azupay.
Hagger, who stepped down in October 2018 after 11 years as a senior executive with National Australia Bank after bruising appearances before the Hayne royal commission, now finds himself besieged with approaches from investment bankers, dealmakers and people with companies for sale as they realise the extent of the growing cheque book of the mild-mannered piano player behind Forrest’s private business interests.
With the assistance of chief investment officer John Hartman, who joined Forrest in 2012 after serving a 15-month sentence for insider trading in Sydney, and an expanding group of executives, Hagger is now running the largest private conglomerate in the country, which is set to step up its pace fuelled by the cash from Australia’s iron ore boom.
“We are looking for the best deals in Australia, whether they be $10m or $1bn,” Hagger said from Tattarang’s headquarters in the Old Swan Brewery in Perth that the company bought a few months after he became chief executive in March 2019.
“People know we are in the market to acquire and that we have a different approach to private equity. We are not looking to flip businesses, we are looking to buy in and invest for the long term and create value.”
It’s a role that is now seeing Tattarang, whose various businesses employ some 2000 people, go head to head with private equity bidders for companies, as it did with the purchase of RM ­Williams last year from Louis Vuitton-backed private equity firm L Catterton. That deal will ­result in all the production of the Adelaide-based RM Williams products moving back onshore.
“I expect there will be an ongoing dynamic to compete with private equity for some of the best deals in Australia,” Hagger says.
The Forrest family originally operated both its private business and philanthropic work under the name of Minderoo. Early last year the private business interests came under the new business name of Tattarang, a fiery stallion once owned by Forrest’s mother, to prevent confusion with the philanthropic work of the Minderoo Foundation.
Hagger has the challenging role of overseeing both Tattarang and Minderoo, which receives funding for its philanthropic work — in areas from anti-slavery to early childhood education — from Tattarang.
With $2bn, Minderoo is now the second-largest private philanthropic organisation in Australia after the Paul Ramsay Foundation.
The change of name to Tattarang last year has helped boost the public profile of Forrest’s private investment arm and draw attention to its growing cheque book.
“Things changed massively when we changed the name to Tattarang and we were rumoured to be interested in Virgin,” Hagger says. “People understood what Tattarang was and since then deal flow has been incredibly strong.”
Tattarang’s two main arms are its food and agribusiness company, the Harvest Road Group, headed by Paul Slaughter, the former chief of the Australian operations of food company Mrs Mac’s, and Squadron Energy, which owns wind energy company Windlab, a stake in the Sun Cable solar energy project that will link up Australia, Singapore and Indonesia, and the Australian Industrial Energy LNG importing terminal.
In the past year, Harvest Road, which has a feedlot and processing facility near Moora in the wheat belt of Western Australia, bought a cattle station in the Kimberley, two properties at Hill River and launched Leeuwin Coast, a new aquaculture brand that includes Akoya oysters and mussels in the Albany region.
Tattarang has a strong focus on renewable energy, which comes as Forrest is overseeing a push into the sector for Fortescue, looking to diversify beyond its focus on iron ore.
Forrest, who argued the merits of investment in hydrogen energy in his recent Boyer lectures for the ABC, has hired former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull to chair Fortescue Future Industries, an FMG subsidiary looking for global clean energy investment opportunities.
Nick Warner, the former head of the Australian Secret Intelligence Service and secretary of the department of defence, will also join FFI as an adviser.
Under Hagger, Minderoo has hired former South Australian premier Jay Weatherill to head up the early childhood group, Thrive by Five, a favourite of Forrest’s wife Nicola.
He also hired Adrian Turner, the former head of the CSIRO’s data and digital arm Data61, to run Minderoo’s Wildfire and Resilience Program.
Hagger was approached to take the job by Perth businessman Mark Barnaba (whose roles include being a director of Fortescue and the Reserve Bank) after leaving NAB.
Once seen as a successor to former NAB chief executive Andrew Thorburn, Hagger’s fortunes were affected by the fallout from the Hayne royal commission that saw his former boss and other executives in financial services companies exit the industry.
After he stepped down from his role as chief customer officer, consumer banking and wealth management at NAB, the market wondered what he would do next.
With all the big banks exiting wealth management in the wake of the royal commission, jobs were drying up in his sector.
Hagger received a phone call from Barnaba, pitching him the idea of a job running the Forrest family private interests.
“[Barnaba] began to talk to me about the role and it sounded ­extraordinary,” Hagger recalls. Hagger and wife Pam flew to Perth to meet the Forrests and the board.
“We met with board members and the management team members over several days,” he says.
“Pam came with me to the meetings as it was a decision for us as a couple whether we would move from Melbourne to Perth. We were very impressed with Andrew and Nicola. Within a short period of time we had signed up.”
Hagger says he was attracted by the combination of business and philanthropy.
His own philanthropic work has included being chair of the Olivia Newton-John Cancer Centre, a director of the Wheeler Centre for Books, Writing and Ideas and Christian Schools Australia and a director of the Melbourne International Jazz Festival board.
Hagger’s job can have him go from attending a function for one of Forrest’s charities to discussing a major investment deal with Hartman, to chatting with actor Hugh Jackman over his stake in RM Williams, or taking phone calls from Andrew or Nicola.
Hagger and Hartman are constantly looking at new deals that fit in with Forrest family philosophy of long-term capital.
While Tatterang’s six investment arms look diverse, they have a similar aim of looking for long-term investments within a framework of the ideals of the Forrest family.
“We look at businesses we believe are sustainable and will typically carry the nation forward,” Haggar says.
“RM Williams is a great example of the sort of deal that we do. Australians connect deeply with the brand. Our sales are up significantly since we bought it.”
One of the main challenges was bringing manufacturing back onshore, which Forrest promised when he bought it.
Similarly, Tattarang’s investments in renewable energy fit in with the Forrests’ commitment to sustainability.
“The Sun Cable deal is about helping solar energy thrive in this region,” Hagger says. “We are delighted to be working with Michael Cannon-Brookes and his team on the project, which will position Australia and regional markets in the forefront of renewable energy transmission.”
Tattarang is also investing in nickel through its Wyloo Metals arm. Recent deals have included buying a stake in Canadian miner Noront Resources, whose assets include a high-grade nickel project in Ontario and a joint venture with Canada’s Orford Mining, which owns the West Raglan nickel project in Quebec. “Nickel is one of the commodities which Andrew and John [Hartman] and the Wyloo Metals team have identified as having some strong themes behind it as the world moves to having more batteries and automation,” Hagger says.
Hagger is also excited about the prospects for the group’s LNG terminal under construction at Port Kembla that will be able to import gas to the east coast of NSW, and has the potential to supply 75 per cent of the state’s gas needs by the end of next year.
“The conventional way to develop these projects is to negotiate customer offtake agreements and then project finance them,” Hagger says. But he says Tattarang has the resources to build the import terminal itself and operate in the spot market for the gas it imports if it wants to.
In November it signed a memorandum of understanding with energy infrastructure company Jemena to connect the Port Kembla terminal with the NSW eastern gas pipeline via a 12km underground pipeline.
Hagger says Tattarang can work with FMG on projects where their interests coincide, particularly in renewable energy.
“We don’t compete with FMG, but where it is appropriate we can work with it,” he says.
“In our Windlab business, for example, we have some of the world’s best analysts about wind technology.
“With Fortescue Future Industries’ focus on hydrogen, it can be a very useful skill base to have.”
Hagger has also seen Minderoo’s philanthropic arm grow from an organisation with $700m when he joined to more than $2bn.
The Forrests transfer funds from Tattarang to their philanthropic arm depending on need and the projects it is backing.
Minderoo now spends more than $110m a year on its philanthropic activities in 10 different areas ranging from its global anti-slavery campaign to campaigns against plastic waste, and campaigns to help reduce the incidence of cancer.
Hagger talks to the Forrests almost every day on ideas to expand their philanthropic work.
“They are both very wise and have so much value to add,” he says. “I have learned a huge amount from Andrew about the way he thinks about deals, how they will play out and how they can add value to the future of the group and for the country.”
Hagger says he now feels he has the building blocks in place for the Tattarang group: “We plan to continue to grow — not in a frenetic way — but in a fast-paced way.
“We want to ensure that the choices we make today not only stand the test of time but create new jobs and tackle some of the planet’s great issues.”
Word count: 1746
