THOUSANDS of jobs and billions of dollars involved in constructing nearly 100 renewable energy projects in South Australia are being fast-tracked with a sales route to NSW opening up.
Global companies from France, Singapore and Spain as well as the national market are lining up to use a $2.3 billion electricity interconnector between SA and NSW.
The 900km transmission line, called Project EnergyConnect, this week passed a major milestone, achieving approval on costs from the Australian Energy Regulator and a formal commitment on funding from the NSW side of a joint venture with SA’s ElectraNet.
The biggest investor is Neoen, which operates the big battery and wind farm at Hornsdale, near Jamestown, and has approval for a $500 million project at Crystal Brook and a $3 billion Goyder South project, near Burra.
“Project EnergyConnect is vital to unlocking the full potential of Neoen’s multi-gigawatt Goyder Renewables Zone and the significant jobs and investment it represents for SA,” Neoen managing director Louis de Sambucy said.
Site works have yet to begin on the projects but the interconnector will be a major factor in the French-listed company making its final investment decisions.
Neoen said two-thirds, or $2 billion, of the Goyder South project would rely on being able to export electricity to NSW. A further project, Goyder North, is also in planning.
The increased availability of generation from NSW and improved reliability would decrease wholesale prices, delivering a $100 a year net benefit to SA households, modelling by Acil Allen for ElectraNet estimates.
“EnergyConnect will unlock $5 billion to $10 billion of investment in renewable energy projects and create thousands of jobs in SA,” Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said. “This $2.3 billion investment will create a freeway for exporting green power from South Australia and is central to achieving our ambition for net-100 per cent renewables in the 2030s.” Opposition energy spokesman Tom Koutsantonis is sceptical about the investments. “Given the NSW government will directly subsidise the development of renewables in NSW to achieve the construction of $32 billion of renewables I see all the development on the NSW side of the border,” he said.
“If you build a renewable development in NSW you can access a $50 million fund, in SA you can access the warm wishes of the Premier.” A spokeswoman for NSW transmission company TransGrid said projects around Broken Hill and Balranald would benefit from the line from Robertstown to Wagga Wagga but that “consumers in both states will have access to low-cost sources of energy generation across the border”.
ElectraNet’s board is due to announce a decision on its $457.4 million part of the project, which also must meet environmental and technical approvals.
SA’s high level of renewable generation has already cut wholesale prices and the state has the lowest priced futures contracts, displacing Queensland, according to the Australian Energy Market Operator’s latest quarterly report. Renewable energy projects currently under construction in SA will contribute 416MW of electricity generation capacity to the grid.
If all approved projects waiting in the pipeline are built, it will add a further 10,400MW of capacity. Further planned, but not yet approved, projects would contribute another 5571MW, taking the total to 16,387MW of generation capacity added to the grid if all are built. By way of comparison, South Australia’s consumption typically hovers around 1500MW and the average demand for the entire National Electricity Market in the first quarter of 2021 was 21,192MW.
Reliant on sun and wind, renewable energy plants operate at about a third of their capacity on average. Nexif Energy, which is now constructing the $172 million stage 2 of its wind farm at Lincoln Gap, between Port Augusta and Whyalla, said Project EnergyConnect would help consideration of a stage three. “The interconnector will assist with our further investment in SA and support the export of renewable energy interstate,” managing director Charles Rattray, pictured, said.
Singapore-based Vena Energy, which operates a solar farm at Tailem Bend, said the interconnector would help all renewable projects because back-up power from NSW would enable more “firm” power sales contracts.
“Project EnergyConnect certainly has the potential to switch on additional renewable generators and Vena Energy hope to leverage this opportunity into progressing Australia’s transition to renewable energy through stage 2 of our Tailem Bend Solar Project,” Vena planning manager Kori Law said.
Solar River has approval for a $465 million project at Robertstown where construction on stage one is targeted to begin later this year.
PAGE 54: EDITORIAL SEE THE FULL LIST bit.ly/SAenergyconnect
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 754
