Regional SA well placed for jobs surge in energy sector
A HYDROGEN industry will make South Australia a powerhouse in world steel production and national electricity generation, new reports forecast.
In positive signs for regions such as Whyalla, the Riverland and Mid North, the irreversible global switch to cleaner, green energy plays to SA’s natural advantages.
Thousands of jobs would be created in renewable energy projects this decade. CONTINUED PAGE 2 Renewables to power jobs in SA FROM PAGE 1 Jobs will be created under a fast economic growth scenario, with hydrogen playing a key role in fighting climate change, according to an Australian Energy Market Operator report on SA.
Separately, Adelaide University-led research published today positions hydrogen as a key to transforming heavy industry such as steel and cement, where it is hard to reduce emissions.
“Consumer demand for green products is generating the new market premiums that are beginning to drive the investment needed to decarbonise the heavy industry sector,” Adelaide University Professor Gus Nathan said.
The report from the university’s Centre for Energy Technology says so-called green steel, made using hydrogen instead of coal, was at a tipping point, with a convergence between growing market demand, advanced technology and the falling price of hydrogen.
Prof Nathan stressed he was not in a position to comment on financial issues faced by Whyalla steelworks owner Sanjeev Gupta, but he was confident the Eyre Peninsula town’s future would be bright.
“It has this great synergy of a high-quality iron ore resource and renewable energy, all the ingredients for a bright long-term future,” he said.
The centre’s report, HiTemp Outlook on processing minerals, was co-authored by researchers from universities, government and business in Australia, US, Germany and other places.
It noted that Europe has already committed to net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 and is moving to introduce import taxes on carbon-intensive products.
These market changes would favour green steel.
Whyalla’s particular advantage would be making the hydrogen in SA using electricity generated by local wind and solar generation. This would avoid the costly process of long-distance transport of hydrogen.
Today, 99.5 per cent of Australia’s iron ore is exported unprocessed. “Imagine the benefit of turning even a decent slice of these exports into products worth three or four times the value of the raw ore,” Prof Nathan said.
The university report’s launch comes as the Australian Energy Market Operator publishes a forecast on SA’s electricity generation through to 2029-30.
AEMO considers three scenarios, which vary by the pace of policy-driven change to decarbonisation.
For the first time, it labels the fastest pace as the “hydrogen scenario”, where rapid technological progress has hydrogen replacing a fifth of the state’s natural gas use by 2040.
In its other two scenarios there would be a decrease in the electricity generated in SA and the state would rely on imports from Victoria.
In the hydrogen scenario, generation would increase this decade from 15 terawatt hours a year to 27 terawatt hours with major wind farm projects to be built in the Mid North and South-East, and solar farms in the Riverland.
Because demand for electricity to produce hydrogen would be flexible – drawing power when electricity prices were low – these new generators would sell renewable energy to the eastern states when prices were high, making SA a significant electricity exporter.
“The market operator’s projections show that the faster pace of change being driven by the Marshall Government’s policies will deliver thousands of jobs in new renewable energy projects,” Energy and Mining Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said.
“AEMO’s report shows brisk progress towards the Marshall Government’s intention of net-100 per cent renewable energy by 2030.” The State Opposition also champions hydrogen, announcing last month a $593m policy to kickstart the industry. PAGE 16: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 635
