Premier tours Port Augusta sites
Construction has commenced on a major renewable energy project at Port Augusta, adding to another existing project already underway.
Iberdrola's $500-million 317 megawatt hybrid wind and solar farm at the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park southeast of the city broke ground on Friday, while Nexif Energy has begun its $170-million stage two expansion at the Lincoln Gap Wind Farm across Spencer Gulf.
Premier Steven Marshall and Energy and Mining Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan visited the sites today, as the Premier turned the sod on the two projects.
The Iberdrola project is expected to take 18 months to complete and Mr Marshall said this project, plus the Lincoln Gap Wind Farm, would place South Australia in an important energy position.
"It's a vitally important project, not just for local jobs but for our nation as we move to a more stable form of renewable energy going forward," he said.
"We are really pleased to have this project come into South Australia and we're very grateful for Iberdrola's significant investment of $500m in this new facility that will be here for decades and decades to come.
"It perfectly compliments our plans as a state to produce more renewable energy and to build and interconnector with the most populated state, New South Wales, and create that highway where we can bring in energy when we need to stabilise our grid, but most importantly to be exporting our electrons, our renewable energy into New South Wales."
Mr van Holst Pellekaan said the mix of wind and solar would showcase a new generation of renewables designed to provide predictable power more uniformly across the day.
"The project's combined solar and wind generation output is expected to closely match South Australia's electricity demand profile which will help place downwards pressure on electricity prices while also assisting with the security and reliability of the grid," he said.
About 200 jobs are expected during construction, with 20 full-time jobs based on-site once construction is completed.
The Lincoln Gap project is creating 110 construction jobs and 10 full-time positions upon completion.
Iberdrola's country manager Fernando Santamaria said the project signified the company's commitment to the Australian market.
"We have seen quick progress in challenging times, so it is great to have spades in the ground already on our first ever project in Australia," he said.
"Port Augusta is a major commitment in terms of investment and clean energy capacity, both for the Australian renewables market and for Iberdrola's global project portfolio.
"The project is delivering jobs and significant economic value for the local region."
Mr Santamaria said the Australian renewable energy sector offered "great potential".
DP Energy is a project partner of Iberdrola and its Australian director Catherine Way said it was an exciting day.
"It marks the beginning of construction on the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, which when built will be one of the largest hybrid power stations in the southern hemisphere," she said.
"It is a large solar PV and wind-powered project and it will straddle the highway in Port Augusta so when you come from the south you will see wind turbines on either side of the highway, you'll then solar PV and other renewable energy facilities, so it will mark the Port Augusta renewable energy highway of the future.
"This marks the end of coal-fired power station and the beginning of the renewable energy future."
Iberdola has recently signed contracts for its Port Augusta project with Vestas for the supply and installation of 50 wind turbines with a 4.2MW capacity, and with Longi for almost 250,000 solar PV panels.
Elecnor will construct the storage areas and access roads, plus deliver the export transmission line, the substation and wind farm Balance of Plant. Sterling and Wilson will construct the solar farm.
Iberdola said it would use its experience on more than 40 different projects globally through the COVID-19 pandemic to ensure all work at Port Augusta was conducted in a safe environment, while delivering investment to support employment and local economies during this time.
CREDIT: Luca Cetta
Word count: 678
