QANTAS is to establish a new aircraft base in Adelaide that will create 200 jobs and boost visitors to the state by more than 500,000 annually.
It comes as US technology consulting firm, MTX Group, yesterday announced Adelaide will be the base of its first service hub outside the US, creating 500 jobs in the next three to five years.
Premier Steven Marshall said the expansion plans of both global companies was a “shot in the arm” for the state’s economy. Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce said an Embraer E190s base would be established at Adelaide Airport.
He said taxpayer assistance was “critical” to lure the aircraft base and jobs, which would create an economic “multiplier” worth 10 times. He would not reveal what incentives were used to help lure the company to SA.
“Basing these aircraft in Adelaide means we can service South Australia better and help bring more visitors to the state,” he said. “The E190 is a great aircraft for the Adelaide market, with its size, range and economics opening up a number of new destinations that wouldn’t be viable with the larger 737 aircraft.” Mr Marshall said the aircraft base is a boost for the SA aviation industry. “The base will create aviation and maintenance jobs, increase tourism and position Adelaide as Australia’s regional aviation hub,” Mr Marshall said.
Mr Marshall said the taxpayer “incentive” was an “excellent investment on behalf of the people of South Australia”.
He said the announcement by Texan MTX Group to establish itself in Adelaide cements the state’s hi-tech ecosystem as one of the world’s best, with the state continuing to attract leading global technology companies.
“As a government, we have linked two of the world’s leading artificial intelligence and data analytics capabilities here in Adelaide – the Australian Institute for Machine Learning and MIT big data Living Lab – and that is a big attraction to companies such as MTX,” Mr Marshall said.
MTX Group founder and chairman Das Nobel said: “South Australia offers a unique platform through research, skills and collaborations that will enable development opportunities in AI, space technology, renewable energy and health.” “MTX will be able to bridge academic consortiums and businesses in a mutual partnership that provides salient training internships, high-paying jobs, and curriculum to this talent source.” The company has already started advertising roles in SA.
CREDIT: ANDREW HOUGH
Word count: 395
