GREEN ZONE - FUTURE ADELAIDE INITIATIVE SOUTH Australia is leading the country on climate action, renewables and waste management so it’s no wonder the state is home to a wealth of talented individuals in the environment sector.
As part of The Advertiser and Sunday Mail Green Zone campaign, we asked a panel of experts to rank the most influential people in this important arena.
The panel adopted the strict criteria: (1) most influential in the environment space within the past two decades; and, (2) currently living in SA.
Internationally acclaimed conservation biologist Prof Hugh Possingham and panel member, chair of the University of Adelaide’s Environment Institute, said it was no surprise that Dr Barbara Hardy, 94, was no. 1.
“Barbara’s work and influence will continue for decades, if not centuries,” he said.
“It has been huge. She was into conservation well before it was popular.” When Dr Hardy was named Senior Australian of the Year in 2014, she was recognised for having “initiated many changes to public policy, practice and even the way people think about science and the environment”.
Australian Science Media Centre chief executive Susannah Eliott led the panel, which also included the Environment and Water Department’s executive director of strategy, science and corporate services, Sandy Carruthers and former department chief executive Sandy Pitcher, along with Prof Possingham, who works at the University of Queensland.
1 Dr Barbara Hardy, earth scientist, conservationist Universally admired and respected, scientist and conservationist Dr Barbara Hardy has been a firm fixture of the local environment sector over decades.
Wife of the late Thomas Hardy of the famous winemaking family, Dr Hardy has dedicated much of her life to volunteeering, advocating for science education, raising money the environment and community causes.
As one of the University of Adelaide’s first female science graduates in 1947, Dr Hardy took a role with CSIRO but soon turned to volunteering.
She has lobbied politicians about environmental and heritage issues, helped save Kingston House from demolition, supported the Australian Heritage Commission and Landcare, and established the National Parks Foundation (now the Nature Foundation). Protecting the environment for future generations has motivated her public service.
2 Prof Chris Daniels, Green Adelaide chair and adjunct Professor Boundless energy and enthusiasm for conserving wildlife and connecting people with nature has propelled Professor Chris Daniels into a multitude of roles across Adelaide’s environment scene.
The former Cleland Wildlife Park director is the driving force behind Adelaide’s bid to become a National Park City, as chair of the SA Government agency responsible for landscape management of the state’s capital: Green Adelaide.
He retains his professor title through connections to both UniSA, as adjunct Professor of Biology (where he set up the Barbara Hardy Institute, and led citizen science projects) and University of Adelaide, as adjunct Professor of Zoology.
Professor Daniels has written 10 books including Our Country (2021), Adelaide Nature of a City (2005) and Adelaide Water of a City (2010), plus more than 250 scientific and community publications.
3 Assoc Prof David Paton, University of Adelaide ecologist, BioR director Never afraid to speak truth to power, passionate ecologist Associate Professor David Paton is a champion for the Coorong and fierce protector of birds.
He channelled his frustration over mismanagement of the Murray River and alarm at the precipitous decline of woodland birds into an ambitious project to restore the habitat of the Mt Lofty Ranges, as the director of the charity BioR.
He is an authority on revegetation and habitat restoration, bird-plant associations (pollination), Murray River and Coorong ecology, management of overabundant animals, and landscape responses to fire and drought.
In 2008 he was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for “service to conservation and the environment through research into the ecology and behaviour of Australian birds, to the management and restoration of the natural environment, and to education”.
4 Vicki-Jo Russell, Trees for Life, Nature Festival Consultant A driving force in biodiversity conservation for over 25 years, Vicki-Jo Russell brings people and plants together.
She studied ecology and psychology at university and has worked for in a variety of roles, mainly for environmental NGOs including WWF-Australia, Conservation SA, Zoos SA and currently Trees For Life.
Through her private consultancy VJConsults she has delivered strategic facilitation and planning services for the environment and community service sectors. She chairs the Nature Festival, co-chairs the state’s Nature of SA project and chairs the Amongst It initiative.
In 2014 she won the SA Premier’s Award for Service to Natural Resource Management.
She has also been named a Member of the Order of Australia for her service to threatened species recovery and community engagement in nature conservation.
5 Dr Katherine Moseby, Ecological Horizons After 25 years of living and working in Australia’s deserts, Dr Katherine Moseby is at the forefront of many of SA’s efforts to conserve and reintroduce wildlife.
A co-founder of four conservation projects: Arid Recovery, Tetepare Island, Wild Deserts and Middleback Alliance, Dr Moseby has found new ways to restore biodiversity including a feral-proof fence that can stop foxes at the ground and cats from climbing over. With her husband Dr John Read, Dr Moseby runs consultancy Ecological Horizons, providing pest and native fauna monitoring and advice across Australia and beyond.
6 Dr John Read, Ecological Horizons, Uni Adelaide On the frontline of the war against feral cats in SA’s arid lands is Dr John Read, an ecologist with over 120 peer reviewed journal articles to his name.
A co-director of consultancy Ecological Horizons with his wife Dr Katherine Moseby, Dr Read developed the Felixer, a device that uses lasers to identify feral cats and mark them with poison gel, killing them while sparing local wildlife.
Between projects, Dr Read has authored several books on his time in the SA Outback.
He also founded the Thylation Foundation, a not-for-profit company helping develop and commercialise new conservation innovations.
7 Assoc Prof Monica Oliphant, physicist Solar power pioneer Monica Oliphant has devoted her long career – and much of her own time without financial reward – to the promotion of renewable energy both in Australia and overseas.
She studied physics at the University of Adelaide, where she met husband Michael, son of famous physicist Sir Mark Oliphant, then London.
As a senior research scientist with the Electricity Trust of SA for almost two decades, Mrs Oliphant’s work on renewable energy enabled grid-connected solar and wind.
Volunteering her time on boards and energy associations culminated in the presidency of the International Solar Energy Society (2008-09). She was named Senior South Australian of the Year in 2016.
8 Parry Agius, Linking Futures, Consultant As an inspiring leader and facilitator, Parry Agius brokers partnerships between Indigenous groups, government and industry, drawing on a background in community development, native title, natural resource management and primary industries.
He has worked for and with all tiers of government, small and medium business, larger corporations and not-for-profit Indigenous groups and businesses in remote and regional communities throughout Australia.
In 2000, he was awarded the first Prime Minister’s Centenary Medal for his work with Aboriginal people.
As chair of the new Alinytjara Wilurara Landscape Board and previously presiding member of the Alinytjara Wilurara Natural Resources Board (2011-19) he leads the conservation, traditional use and occupation of more than 250,000sq km from the Northern Territory and West Australian borders south to the Great Australian Bight.
9 Sarah Sutter, Nature Play SA CEO chief executive A new generation of children is learning to love the outdoors under the leadership of former netballer Sarah Sutter.
As Nature Play SA chief executive from its inception in 2014, Ms Sutter has built the organisation from the ground to encourage children, families and schools to get back into nature and spend time outdoors.
When the Covid-19 pandemic made these events almost impossible to organise of late, Ms Sutter and the team spent the beginning of lockdown put together a book with more than 200 tips and ideas to connect with nature while socially distancing.
10 Craig Wilkins, Conservation SA CEO chief executive In his seven years as chief executive of the state’s peak environment body, the Conservation Council of SA, Craig Wilkins has become a prominent advocate for nature, standing up for sustainability and defending the rights of wild creatures.
He is a firm believer in “collective altruism, the act of people generously working together on behalf of others and the planet we call home”.
Mr Wilkins claims to “straddle the insider/outsider divide” by working collaboratively with government as a member of the Premier’s Climate Change Council since 2017, the Adelaide Parklands Authority since 2019 and other groups including the Grote Street Business Precinct.
He earnt his stripes in the office of Greens MLC Mark Parnell (2006-13) after having worked for three years within state government on green city and zero waste projects, coming from a background in public health.
11 Natasha Davis, Trees for Life SA CEO Originally a volunteer grower, Natasha Davis now leads Trees for Life and chairs the SA Nature Alliance – a group of 12 organisations working to restore nature in this state.
Before taking up the post at Trees for Life, she worked as director of a sustainability business and managed community engagement programs in water and biodiversity, following a long-held interest in environmental issues, hiking and exploring Australia.
In recent months, she has been part of Greater Adelaide’s National Park City movement, which advocates for a cooler, greener and wilder city.
Ms Davis has a Masters of Environmental Management, a Graduate Diploma in East Asian Studies and a Bachelor of Economics.
12 David Speirs, Environment and Water Minister Having served as Environment Minister since 2018, David Speirs has achieved some significant wins in the portfolio.
This year, SA became the first Australian state to ban several types of single-use plastics, many years after leading on the phasing-out of plastic shopping bags.
The government is transforming O’Halloran Hill’s historic Glenthorne Farm property into a new national park, after striking a deal with former landowner, the University of Adelaide. It followed a $10m commitment over four years to protect the property as part of a new 1500ha national park. That park would also include O’Halloran Hill Recreation Park, Hallett Cove and Marino conservation parks, Happy Valley Reservoir and the Field River Valley.
Mr Speirs’ push to progressively open up reservoirs to the public has resulted in a range of new parks for locals and tourists to walk, picnic and kayak, but has also sparked worries about water quality.
The works are part of the state government’s Parks 2025 plan, which involves spending more than $130m on park upgrades between its 2018 election victory and 2025.
13 Martin Haese, Business SA CEO chief executive The former Adelaide Lord Mayor heads up the Premier’s Climate Change Council and is Business SA chief executive.
Mr Haese chaired the Council of Capital City Lord Mayors and delivered keynote speeches at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris 2015 and the World Cities Summit in Singapore 2018.
As mayor, he drove strong sustainability and technology agendas culminating in Carbon Neutral Adelaide 2025.
Following the release of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s landmark report last week, Mr Haese said the state was well-placed to help other states and countries address their climate targets. “It could … present an opportunity for SA to effectively assist other jurisdictions as a solutions provider which could mean employment for SA (and) investment for SA,” he said.
14 Peter Owen, Wilderness Society SA director From the Great Australian Bight to the Arkaroola Mountains, protecting SA’s natural assets has been Peter Owen’s mission for the past 20 years.
His campaigning against mining and drilling projects earned him the title of Australian Environmentalist of the Year in 2016.
The director of the Wilderness Society SA, Mr Owen was instrumental in the declaration of SA’s 19 marine parks, and more recently the formation of the Great Australian Bight Alliance, a group which has fought off a number of multinational companies as they attempted to set up gas exploration projects off the SA coastline.
15 Sarah Hanson-Young, The Greens, SA Senator A fierce defender of the Murray and staunch fighter in the battle against big oil and gas in the Great Australian Bight, Sarah Hanson-Young is a strong SA voice in the senate.
In 2007 she was the youngest person elected to the senate and the youngest woman elected to federal parliament (25).
She holds the crucial Green portfolios of environment and biodiversity; and water and the Murray Darling Basin, among others.
Holding the firm belief that “the economy must deliver for both people and planet”, Ms Hanson-Young is especially proud of her work to protect and conserve the environment, grow the renewable energy industry and support communities when they push back against unsustainable development.
She has recently railed against attempts to streamline environment approvals for big projects and supported the Back Off campaign against mining in the Adelaide Hills.
16 Prof Robert (Bob) Hill, Uni Adelaide Environment Institute director Botanist Professor Robert Hill leads the University of Adelaide’s Environment Institute, a multidisciplinary team of scientists searching for the solutions to many environmental problems such as those posed by climate change.
As director of the Institute he has raised awareness of the challenges and opportunities climate change presents for Adelaide and SA.
He has studied the impact of past climate change on the evolution of Australian vegetation, with implications for the future. This research has attracted a long list of accolades, including the Clarke and Burbidge medals for achievements in natural sciences and botany respectively.
17 Assoc Prof Patrick O’Connor, University of Adelaide, Nature Conservation Society SA president Evidence-based natural resource management demands rigorous monitoring and reporting, argues ecologist Associate Professor Patrick O’Connor.
He stands at the intersection of economics and ecology, with a joint appointment straddling both disciplines at the University of Adelaide.
As president of the Nature Conservation Society of SA he calls for greater investment in targeted large-scale restoration as well as systematic data collection to better inform conservation efforts.
His own research has shown woodland birds are disappearing from the Mount Lofty Ranges at an alarming rate.
Over the past 20 years, trained observers recorded a decrease in small-bodied woodland specialists such as the diamond firetail, superb fairy wren and spotted pardalote, alongside an increase in large, generalist, native birds that don’t rely on woodland habitat such as the little corella, galah and eastern rosella.
18 John Schutz, Environment and Water Department CEO Arguably the most powerful person in the state’s Environment and Water Department, appointed chief executive in October 2018, John Schutz was previously director of the National Parks and Wildlife Service of SA (2013-18).
He has provided leadership and strategic direction for high-profile biodiversity, land conservation and land management policies and programs in SA and has played a key role in supporting Aboriginal engagement in the conservation of natural ecosystems, particularly through National Parks co-management boards.
Coming from a background in production nurseries and vineyard management, Mr Schutz joined the Mount Lofty Botanic Garden as a horticulturalist before moving into leadership roles at a number of Australian botanical gardens.
He is currently overseeing the rebuild of Kangaroo Island National Parks and Wildlife Service infrastructure and the recovery of biodiversity after the devastating 2019-20 summer fires.
19 Tony Circelli, EPA CEO Mechanical engineer Tony Circelli rose through the ranks of SA’s independent environment regulator to become chief executive in May 2014. He also sits on the state’s Senior Management Council.
Having worked in the EPA since its establishment in 1995, holding a variety of senior executive positions, he knows and works within the authority’s limits, particularly around environmental authorisations or licences.
Largely in response to criticism for mishandling public communication on the contamination of soil and groundwater at Clovelly Park in 2008, the organisation has gradually become more open, willing to share information and receive feedback.
In February the EPA board, of which Mr Circelli is a member, rejected a McLaren Vale dump’s bid to accept PFAS- contaminated waste. Resources are increasingly available online through the searchable public register and other innovations such real-time air quality monitoring.
20 Prof Simon Goldsworthy, SARDI For nearly 30 years, Professor Simon Goldsworthy has been monitoring the health of marine mammal and bird populations in Australia and overseas.
Since 2004, he has been working at the South Australian Research and Development Institute leading research on ecosystem effects of fishing and aquaculture. The team focuses on the impacts of fishing and aquaculture on marine wildlife and keeping SA’s oceans sustainable.
Professor Goldsworthy is also monitoring fur seal and sea lion populations, with his research sounding the alarm on declining sea lion numbers off the coastlines of Australia.
Read the full bios on all 50 of South Australia's leading environmentalists by scanning the code or visiting bit.ly/envirotop50
… AND OUR 21 TO 50 21. Duncan Mackenzie 22. Elaine Bensted 23. Dr Peri Coleman 24. Peter Copley 25. Allan Holmes 26. Tim Jarvis 27. Jon Lamb 28. Bunna Lawrie 29. Karlene Maywald 30. Jeffrey Newchurch 31. Mark Parnell 32. Dr Susan Close 33. Dr Peggy Rismiller 34. Neville Bonney 35. Bev Langley 36. Vaughan Levitzke 37. John Phillips 38. Prof Corey Bradshaw 39. Isobelle Campbell 40. John O’Brien 41. Dr Katja Hogendoorn 42. Dr Sheryn Pitman 43. Sophie Thomson 44. Dr Mike Bossley 45. Prof Andrew Stock 46. Adj Prof Alan Noble 47. Anita Nedosyko 48. Ben Wilson 49. Rodney Fox 50. Prof Andrew Lowe
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE
Word count: 2912
