Vital education THERE is bound to be some outcry, or at least misunderstanding, of the “cheap loans” offered to various private schools (“Public loans to private schools”, The Advertiser, Monday).
The Advertiser details the Christian and Catholic schools receiving these loans. These schools are vital to the wellbeing of education in South Australia. Imagine the demand on the public sector without these schools, which are relatively low-fee institutions.
Parents choose them for the learning environments their children flourish under. Without government assistance, these services wouldn’t be possible.
It’s the old argument of public versus private. State hospitals would be bursting at their seams without their private counterparts.
All schools face challenges to meet the needs of their students. This is certainly true of these private schools on the outer fringes of the city where there is an ever-growing population.
More demand is there for all schools, public and private.
RAY HAMMAT, Athelstone Expensive nuclear THERE is a wealth of online information from official sources, including national and also intergovernmental organisations, that explain how grid-scale energy needs can be met by renewable-energy sources.
One only needs the desire to look for it.
For a start, try searching: “renewable energy + firming + batteries”. And, since everything comes down to money, wouldn’t everyone want to support not only the cleanest, but also the cheapest, option?
In that regard the advice of the CSIRO is abundantly clear that renewables are the cheapest new-build power in Australia.
Therefore it is inexplicable to me why people still suggest the most expensive option, nuclear power, as a solution (”Nuclear option”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Perhaps ideology is to blame.
C. FAULKNER, Cheltenham Natural support CONGRATULATIONS to Rex Jory for his excellent article “Why not allow high-rise housing development in the parklands on the northern side of Greenhill Rd?” (The Advertiser, Monday).
I totally agree with his clever suggestion: “The government should rescind its plans to rezone areas of the parklands and put the genie back in the bottle. It is a muddle-headed idea that would destroy a unique element of Adelaide’s heritage.” People value and enjoy the beauty of the gum trees and natural parklands. High-rise homes are overtaking our landscape in already developed suburban areas. Leave what we have left of our pristine parklands.
They are an asset to our environment, including a valuable carbon sink and source of oxygen, homes for wildlife and a welcome relief from concrete and bitumen.
PHIL CORNELIUS, Seacliff Park Battling fires IS fire a priority?
With southern Australian bushfires on the TV again – fortunately, this time in fictionalised ABC series Fires – will we get an announcement soon about strengthening our airborne firefighting capability with Australian owned aircraft?
Or is this not a national-security issue to spend big on?
Expensive submarines are clearly not going to help.
JIM ALLEN, Panorama Border tensions I READ with concern the article “Anxious wait for families” (The Advertiser, Monday).
If there has been criticism of the manner South Australia has managed the Covid-19 pandemic, it has been the management of our borders.
From people not able to see their dying relatives or loved ones, to refusing travel, it has created public tension.
Now with more than 8000 border travel applications outstanding, and with the Christmas holiday period looming, the state government would be wise to address bureaucratic incompetence or face the wrath of the voter.
DES KEMP, St Agnes Out in the cold I CAME here to Thredbo to fulfil a catering contract that was signed before the Covid-19 outbreak in Sydney.
I left Adelaide at the end of June. Yes, there were a few cases in Sydney then, but no one thought it would be this severe.
As my contract was coming to a close, on August 23 I submitted my application to SA Health to return home.
I received an email confirming receipt of my application and telling me it may take up to two weeks. Seven weeks later my application hasn’t been completed.
On that email I was given an address to communicate with SA Health and update them with any changes.
I sent correspondence a few times.
Once I received an auto response telling me they’d received the email but there was no follow up.
I called the Covid-19 hotline and was told there was nothing they could do. All the other South Australians that I knew here have now been approved to return and have done so, mostly people whose livelihoods are not impacted by being away from home.
I found another official email address. I have sent correspondence there and have received no response.
My situation is now desperate as I’ll likely be homeless here in NSW. I have been deserted by SA Health and the state government.
I’m a South Australian too. ROGER CAMPBELL, Adelaide
Word count: 800
