During last year’s COVID-19 lockdown, South Australian Liberal Premier Steven Marshall rang the chief executives and chairs of major companies around the country to pitch his story about expanding their operations in his state.
Marshall, a former businessman who became Premier in the election of March 2018, was determined to tell his story of his state’s new focus on industries such as hydrogen and renewable energy, defence, space, cybersecurity and machine learning, in addition to its traditional sectors of agriculture, mining, construction, manufacturing and tourism.
“When we came to government, we needed to develop a strategic plan for the state,” he told guests at The Australian’s Industries of Tomorrow boardroom lunch in Sydney last week, held in partnership with the South Australian government.
“Our intention was to change the trajectory we were on.” While the plan was interrupted by lockdowns because of the pandemic, Marshall used the time to make phone calls to business leaders around the country to urge them to take a new look at investing in SA.
“We needed to come out of the virus stronger than before,” he said. “We couldn’t use the virus as an excuse to put our plans completely on hold.” With employers taking a more flexible view on where staff could work, Marshall grasped the opportunity to make a new case for relocation to SA: “We decided we needed to lean into the opportunity around COVID, of the permanent disruption around how the workforce is organised, to reposition South Australia.” One of the companies that responded was consulting firm Accenture, whose chairman Bob Easton committed to setting up a new hub in Adelaide that would create 2000 new jobs across five years.
Based at Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen creative, innovation and technology park, Accenture’s new aerospace and defence-focused technology hub will act as a base for investments in aerospace, defence and national security, including cybersecurity.
It will include advanced technology centres of excellence for companies such as Oracle, SAP, Splunk and Salesforce that will develop capabilities in advanced analytics and artificial intelligence.
“It was a deal which was conceived during the pandemic and executed during the pandemic,” Marshall said.
Announced in September last year, the deal has already generated 200 new jobs. Marshall sees cybersecurity as a key industry of the future that SA can help develop.
“Cyber is a great option for the future for us,” he said. “The world will get through this pandemic, but the next major global disruption, unequivocally, will be a cyber disruption. It’s not a matter of whether it will happen, it’s just a matter of when it happens.” Marshall sees the Accenture project as part of a training program to develop skills in cybersecurity, which will be part of an ecosystem to attract major companies to the state.
“What we’ve done in South Australia is to deliver the largest commercial cyber range in the nation, a massive training program,” he said. “So now we’ve got something to go on sale to the large companies — the banks and the big energy providers.” It’s an area Marshall says will be “one of the fast growing sectors over the next decade”.
Marshall also sees hydrogen energy as a new area where the state can specialise when there is strong pressure on companies and governments to reduce carbon emissions. “There is an opportunity as the world moves towards a hydrogen economy,” he said.
“At the moment Japan and South Korea are in a virtuous battle to see who can establish the world’s first hydrogen economy.” Japan’s Mitsubishi Heavy Industries announced late last year that it was investing in the H2U group, Australia’s largest developer of green hydrogen and green ammonia projects using power derived from renewable energy sources, which is involved in a project on SA’s Eyre Peninsula.
Marshall said another trial project, in the innovation precinct of Tonsley, a southern suburb of Adelaide, involved the establishment of one of Australia’s largest electrolysers producing green hydrogen, which was being pumped into a gas distribution network.
“We also think there are great opportunities for export by converting hydrogen into ammonia for export out of the port of Whyalla, or maybe another port along the coast of South Australia,” he said. “We really have an ambition to see what we can do in this area.” He said his last overseas trip as Premier had been a visit to Japan where he had signed a memorandum of understanding with a group of major Japanese companies looking at the opportunities around green hydrogen. “I don’t think it is going to happen immediately,” Marshall said, “but there is a realistic opportunity for us in the next five years.”
CREDIT: GLENDA KORPORAAL
Word count: 778
