PREMIER Steven Marshall has returned to his childhood stomping ground to emphasise his working-class roots and spell out the framework for the June 22 state budget.
Taking The Advertiser to the northwestern suburb of Ethelton on Friday, Mr Marshall flipped the switch to campaign mode as he pointed out landmarks, including his boyhood street, former primary school, Scout hall and kindergarten.
The 53-year-old Premier even recalled special family meal venues such as Semaphore Rd’s Exeter Hotel, saying: “Mum would just say ‘Sit up properly, we’re out to dinner’.” Casting ahead to his government’s election budget, Mr Marshall then rode a train from Ethelton to Adelaide Railway Station.
Both stations will be upgraded as part of a $111m, 10-year budget program announced on June 9.
At Adelaide, which will get a $6.4m upgrade between 2021 and 2025, Mr Marshall coincidentally bumped into Semaphore Park couple Barry and Edna Conry.
As a six-year-old, Mr Marshall, in a boat called Rebel 517, crewed against their son at Largs Bay Sailing Club.
“Can you believe a young kid from Largs Bay Sailing Club has ended up as a Liberal Premier of South Australia,” Mr Marshall asked the couple. “No!” Mr Conry emphatically replied.
Asked how he was performing as the state’s leader, Mrs Conry replied: “Oh, he’s all right.” Ethelton is in the Labor heartland seat of Port Adelaide, now held by ALP deputy leader Susan Close.
The Advertiser rode from Ethelton to Adelaide with the Premier, interviewing him about the budget – his government’s most substantial policy document ahead of next March’s state election.
Mr Marshall declared the budget would have two key focuses: creating jobs and addressing problems in the health system that his opponents have branded a crisis.
Health officials are bracing for a surge in demand this weekend after a week of major hospitals’ emergency departments working above their official capacity.
Numerous ambulances have anti-government messages chalked on them – some personally attacking the Premier – in protest at hospital ramping and “critical safety risks” the paramedics’ union argues are posed by crew shortages.
“There’s no doubt that the coronavirus has created some very significant lag effects in terms of presentations to health system – that’s common right around the country and, probably, if we look closely it’s right around the world,” Mr Marshall said. “We know that we’ve got to undo the mess we inherited from the previous government, but also we have an ambition to make the best health system in the country.” Mr Marshall argues his government, elected in 2018, has put more than 1000 health professionals into the system, injected more than $2bn in spending and has more than $1bn in capital upgrades under way.
Asked how the budget would create jobs, Mr Marshall declared “ongoing infrastructure investment is crucial” and vowed a renewed focus on attracting “future industries” such as defence, cyber, hydrogen, renewable energy, ag tech and machine learning.
“You’ll see us further lean into these opportunities between now and the election,” he said, pointing to successes in attracting firms including Google, Amazon and Accenture.
Opposition Leader Peter Malinauskas urged Mr Marshall to tackle a rebuild of health services.
“The state budget presents a real opportunity for Steven Marshall to address the tragic consequences of his cuts to our health system,” he said.
“I really hope he will use this budget to abandon his cuts and make the investments necessary to address the state’s ramping and hospital overcrowding crisis.” PAGE 48: EDITORIAL
MARSHALL ON THE STATE BUDGET … JOBS “I think what we’ll see is a continuing investment in major infrastructure across our state. You’ll see a renewed focus on attracting those future industries to South Australia. We’ve had excellent success to date with bringing in some of the world’s most recognised companies to Adelaide."
SCHOOLS “We hope to have an announcement regarding further educational infrastructure." NEXT ELECTION “I think the most important thing for South Australia is a renewed sense of pride and optimism for our state. That’s what I want to hang my hat on."
CITY AND NORTH ADELAIDE TRAM EXTENSIONS “It’s not, in the short term, a priority for us. There are many things which need to be delivered for our state."
DEBT “The current level of debt is invested in jobs and economic transformation in South Australia at a low interest rate. We have been very prudent in taking on additional debt but it makes no sense to not take advantage of a low-interest-rate environment to build the productive infrastructure that we need for future generations."
WHY ETHELTON STATION “What we’re trying to demonstrate with this budget is … we are not a government which is focused on electoral cycles and pet projects in marginal seats."
COVID-19 “There’s no doubt that the coronavirus has created some very significant lag effects in terms of presentations to health systems – that’s common right around the country."
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 818
