Hospitals valued IN response to Brad Crouch’s article, we wish to reassure our loyal patients that women’s and children’s hospitals are not just buildings that provide specialised care and diagnostic procedures (“Our hospital stays under the knife”, Sunday Mail, May 16).
The profile of maternal and paediatric disease is changing, as have attitudes in caring. Some common reasons for admission to hospital in previous decades have either disappeared or are being managed with a reduction of time in hospital.
But many children now survive extreme prematurity, adding to the increasing number of children with chronic disease as a result of an increase in childhood obesity, neurological disability, respiratory disease, paediatric cancer, diabetes, social and mental health problems.
Admissions, as well as readmissions within 30 days, for chronic problems are increasing and these patients appropriately require a longer length of stay and now occupy almost 50 per cent of all bed days and contribute disproportionately to the overall cost.
There is no indication that this trend is declining.
It is disingenuous of SA Health to justify reductions in bed numbers at the new WCH on the basis of a reduced length of stay for a few simple procedures or an apparent normal vaginal birth, which only occurs in 50 per cent of pregnant women.
The detrimental repercussions of this shortsighted view of a lack of provision for the inevitable expansion of services over time will remain with the women, babies and children of South Australia for the duration of the life cycle of the proposed new hospital.
DR STEVE KEELEY, WCH INTENSIVE CARE PAEDIATRICIAN, AND PROFESSOR JOHN SVIGOS AM
Right to choose MATTHEW Abraham, no one is forcing anyone to have assisted dying, it’s a personal choice (“Don’t sugar-coat it, there’s no coming back from this”, Sunday Mail, May 16).
If you don’t want it, don’t have it. But don’t force others to not have it just because you don’t want it.
Choice is what this Bill is about. Your opinion piece is scaremongering. Choice is a basic human right; how dare you try to take that right away from others. You choose your way and I’ll choose mine.
ANDREA ELLIS Kudla
Stop euthanasia THANK you, Matthew Abraham, for your excellent column on the Voluntary Assisted Dying Bill.
I agree that it is virtually suicide, or could even be murder in some cases. It can be dangerous, especially when someone no longer has the ability to make a serious decision themselves, and so family members wanting the money could organise it.
Surely it would be far better to concentrate on better palliative-care methods. I don’t believe in artificially keeping someone alive when there is no hope. But neither do I believe in killing them.
PAULINE WEBB Victor Harbor
Sacred state guernsey NO, Graham Cornes, leave the South Australian guernsey where it rightly belongs – the SANFL (“Crows can open a new front in the jumper war”, Sunday Mail, May 16).
Unlike Port Adelaide Power, the Adelaide Crows don’t have an identity crisis. We know who we are, we recognise our guernsey and we don’t need to cavort, chant and wave scarfs before our games to prove our existence.
And we certainly don’t need you to drag us into a ridiculous feud between other clubs about the colour of a guernsey. Remember, we are the side for all South Australians.
GRAHAM ROOCKE Clare
Job satisfaction I WRITE regarding “Grand old stores we loved … and lost”.
From 1977-95, I worked at John Martin’s on the fashion floor. Our uniform was black and white.
We had to give our customers excellent service. The fashion was beautiful: Well-made with a perfect fit.
Our chief executive was Geoff Coles, and every day he would come down to the fashion floor, have a chat and make sure all was OK. It was a pleasure to go to work every day.
CLAIRE PETERSSON Mount Barker
Solar shines out IT was late 2016 when then-federal treasurer Scott Morrison was given the green light to trash the Weatherill Labor government’s successful renewable energy, battery storage, and climate-change policies in South Australia. Treasurer Morrison, seemingly inspired by a massive storm-related power outage across SA, was reported making unsubstantiated claims that SA Labor government renewables will switch off power and force SA back into the dark ages.
But a recent CSIRO analysis has confirmed Australia is now a world leader of solar uptakes, with renewables currently providing 60 per cent of SA power usage.
RODNEY H. MEEK Bellevue Heights
Right to register A.A. HODGES, of Birdwood, suggests COVID-19 check-in fines are unfair and we need to learn our rights (“Check-in fines unfair”, Sunday Mail, May 16).
I suggest to this scribe that we not only need to learn our rights, but also our obligations.
From my perspective, in relation to the QR-code check-in, my rights are that when the next outbreak occurs, I will be advised if I had attended a venue or business where an infected person, or a close contact thereof, has also attended. For that right, my obligation is that I will register using the QR code when I enter any registered place.
Our rights and obligations are not always what we want, but they are what is required.
ERIC TAYLOR West Beach
Return of the roses BEFORE the reintroduction of the Adelaide trams, King William Street had manicured lawn and roses down the middle, making it one of the prettiest thoroughfares in the world.
So what happened to the roses? Why couldn’t they have been included in the Rundle Mall redevelopment?
This city has always been about tradition and culture. And yet that concept appears quickly forgotten in favour of monolithic monstrosities that serve a small percentage of the population, look awful and sound like a 747 is about to depart.
Bring back the roses. Please.
GREG TRENOWDEN Andrew’s Farm
Word count: 974
