Port projects at Cape Hardy and Port Spencer are among the sites included in the state government's hydrogen export prospectus, released last week.
The prospectus details three hydrogen hubs, also including Port Bonython and Port Adelaide, to position South Australia at the forefront of global clean hydrogen production and exportation.
Groups associated with the projects have welcomed the release of the prospectus and the role their site could play.
Outlined in the prospectus is the opportunity for exports to be shipped from Eyre Peninsula, with "the potential for small-scale and large-scale export ranging from between 60,000 - 250,000 tpa (tonnes per annum)" of green hydrogen.
The location of the region, connecting renewable resources from Eyre Peninsula to the port, was also recognised.
The Cape Hardy project is backed by Eyre Peninsula Co-operative Bulk Handling Limited (EPCBH), Iron Road and Macquarie Capital, and speaking on behalf of the joint developers, EPCBH chief executive officer Tim Scholz said they welcomed the recognition of the strategic importance the region could play in the state's export future.
"As a true multi-commodity deep-water port, we have consistently promoted the ability of Cape Hardy to deliver benefits not only to the region's grain growers but also to the wider Eyre Peninsula community," he said.
"The release of this prospectus further demonstrates that a multi-commodity port is the best option for the Eyre Peninsula. Our project can deliver that and support growth in the region."
Port Spencer said a hydrogen hub at the site would provide a significant economic boost to the region, creating further local employment in addition to the jobs already being created by construction and port operations.
Peninsula Ports chief executive officer Greg Walters said it was excited by the prospect of the Port Spencer deep water port playing a key role in South Australia's renewable energy future.
"Our recent PER (Public Environmental Report) amendment, which removed the storage and export of iron ore from the project, allowed for the potential of other suitable commodities being managed alongside grain at the port," he said.
"We recognise that any proposed hydrogen development on the Eyre Peninsula will need to go through the full approvals process. However, we believe that with our current approvals in place as the next deep water port on the Eyre Peninsula, that Port Spencer will be attractive to prospective hydrogen investors.
"We look forward to working alongside the South Australian government to attract suitable investment into the state."
Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the prospectus showed South Australia's wind and solar resources could underpin international competitiveness as an exporter of clean hydrogen to Asia and other regions.
"Hydrogen is shaping up as a game-changer in the fight against climate change and our aim is to get the cost down so that it's a commercially attractive option for heavy transport, power generation and use by industry.
"This prospectus reveals that South Australia can become a national and international exporter of clean power, while achieving the goal of net-100 per cent renewable energy."
CREDIT:
Word count: 503
