A long-awaited high-voltage electricity link between South Australia and NSW will go ahead – with promises of cheaper power and a renewable energy boom – after approval from transmission firm ElectraNet.
Delivering the key green light for an interconnector promised for 20 years, ElectraNet has committed $457m for the SA side of the giant $2.3bn, 900km power link.
The project is tipped to save SA households $100 a year, but bills would increase by $6 and then $17 a year before the savings kick in.
It will shore up more than $5bn in renewable energy projects. ElectraNet’s approval follows NSW’s TransGrid, on May 31, agreeing to build its state’s side of the power transmission line – called Project EnergyConnect – that will link Robertstown in SA and Wagga Wagga in NSW with a spur line to Red Cliffs in Victoria.
ElectraNet chief executive Steve Masters said the decision followed five years of assessment and consultation, with the company “leaving no stone unturned” to ensure the project delivered benefits for SA and NSW consumers.
“Over the past five years, ElectraNet has demonstrated, through a rigorous assessment process, that Project EnergyConnect is good for SA and NSW customers, and we now look forward to getting on and building it so those benefits can be realised,” he said.
“Project EnergyConnect is a landmark project that will drive competition in the wholesale electricity market by connecting more low-cost generation to the national electricity grid and support the ongoing transition to a lower-carbon emissions future.” Environmental approval remains the final hurdle for the project, with public consultation due to close on June 25.
Mr Masters said his company would incorporate feedback and recom­mendations into the final plans, committing to start work before the end of the year.
Construction of the 200km line on the SA side of the border is expected to generate 200 jobs, with commissioning expected in 2023.
Mr Masters said there had already been “very good engagement” with stakeholders, including traditional owners of the land affected by the proposed line.
Funding for construction, he said, would be supported by ElectraNet’s existing shareholders – State Grid Corporation of China, Malaysia’s YTL Power and local fund manager Australian Utilities.
South Australian Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the interconnector would deliver cheaper, cleaner and more reliable energy to SA households and businesses, plus spark a renewable-energy jobs boom.
“South Australia is a good global citizen and will become a net exporter of renewable energy as part of our aspiration of net-100 per cent renewables in the 2030s,” he said.
“We have $5bn to $10bn worth of (renewables) projects waiting to be developed in SA, which everybody is now extremely optimistic will proceed.
“There’ll be thousands of jobs connected to this interconnector.” “The surplus electricity which we’ll generate through these new projects in South Australia will be exported into NSW to help NSW with its decarbonisation.” The Australian Energy Regulator, on May 31, agreed the project could cost $2.28bn, which is $55m less than a revised estimate from the companies proposing the project.
The interconnector will have a total line capacity of 800 megawatts – enough to provide energy to 240,000 extra households.
It will include an upgrade to the Robertstown substation and a new substation at Bundey in the state’s Mid North.
SA Premier Steven Marshall said ElectraNet’s approval marked “one of the happiest days I’ve had since becoming Premier of South Australia”.
“This project is going to deliver thousands of jobs, it’s going to lower energy prices, it’s going to lower our emissions, it’s going to stabilise our grid,” he said. “It’s been an exhausting process and today we get the final sign off from ElectraNet.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO PAUL STARICK
Word count: 620
