From Page 13 To the south, in 2015 when Alinta Energy announced the closure of the Northern Power Station in Port Augusta, Sam Johnson, the mayor at the time, said the city would become the renewables capital of the country.
Since then, South Australia's renewable energy boom has achieved a global milestone, with the state becoming the first major jurisdiction in the world to be powered entirely by solar energy. For just over an hour in October last year, 100 per cent of energy demand was met by solar panels alone.
The Marshall Liberal government's Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025 includes 68 actions across seven focus areas, all aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 50 per cent by 2030, and achieving net-zero emissions by the year 2050.
The plan includes greening cities to cool them, supporting better farming practices, helping business and communities address climate risk, adapting natural resources, and planning for more frequent natural hazards.
South Australia will continue to export power domestically through interconnectors to NSW and Victoria and internationally.
The Andrews Labor government released Victoria's Climate Change Framework in 2016 which includes its plan for climate action until 2050 and vision for becoming a leader in climate action. Victoria has also set a 50 per cent renewable energy by 2030 target.
The Victorian 2020-2021 budget included $540 million to establish six renewable energy zones, $12.6 million to bring online more than 600 megawatts of new, clean energy - enough to power 100 per cent of government buildings, including schools and public transport - and $108 million to transition to renewable energy and hydrogen projects, including Australia's first offshore wind generator.
The Victorian government will also invest $797 million in household energy efficiency.
Things are kicking off a little slower up north and in the wild west, however, although none of the states and territories can be accused of ignoring the risk of climate change the way it's being shunned federally.
Queensland's Palaszczuk government has set a target for 50 per cent of Queensland's energy to be sourced from renewables by 2030, Western Australia pitched for net-zero emissions by 2030 this month and the Northern Territory last year committed to net-zero emissions by 2050.
While Prime Minister Scott Morrison acknowledged this month that Australia should get to net-zero "as soon as possible", and preferably by 2050, the road map the nation needs to provide some stability has not been forthcoming.
Dr Jotzo said we need to put a tick in the box of the zero-emission target and then we need to move on.
"The Prime Minister used to say 'There's no point having a target without a plan' and that needs to be a strategy which is really well thought out and has broad acceptance throughout the Australian community, economy and industry," he said.
CREDIT:
Word count: 468
